Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114
ANALYSIS
The human development index and sustainability — a
constructive proposal
Eric Neumayer *
Department of Geography and Enironment, London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street,
London WC2A 2AE, UK
Received 31 January 2001; received in revised form 26 April 2001; accepted 1 May 2001
Abstract
This paper proposes to qualify a country’s human development as potentially unsustainable if the net depreciation
of its manufactured and natural capital stock is bigger than its investment. Linking the Human Development Index
with sustainability in this way would allow the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to check whether
a country is ‘mortgaging the choices of future generations’. An analysis for 155 countries leads to the conclusion that
the indicated human development of 42 countries is potentially unsustainable. Most of these countries have a low
HDI, which means that even this low achievement is not sustainable into the future. The results make a case for both
a policy reform within these countries and for external assistance to help maintain at least this low level of human
development. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Assistance; ‘El Serafy’-method; Genuine saving; HDI; Natural resources
www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolecon
1. Introduction
When the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme (UNDP) launched the Human Develop-
ment Index (HDI) for the first time in 1990 its
major goal was to focus attention away from
income towards a more comprehensive measure
of human development. UNDP did not deny, of
course, that per capita income is one of the main
determinants of a country’s level of human devel-
opment. But it proposed to treat income as only
one out of three factors — the other ones cur-
rently being life expectancy at birth as a proxy for
health achievement and adult literacy together
with educational enrolment as a proxy for educa-
tional attainment. What is more, income is not
privileged as primus inter pares, i.e. it is not given
a higher weight than the two other factors.
Rather, all three variables are aggregated via a
simple arithmetic average into the HDI and are
thus treated equally.
From the beginning, publication of the HDI
has aroused a lot of attention among policy mak-
* Tel.: +44-0207-955-7598; fax: +44-0207-955-7412.
E-mail address: e.neumayer@lse.ac.uk (E. Neumayer).
0921-8009/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0921-8009(01)00201-4
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114102
ers and the wider public alike. Indeed, when the
HDI is annually launched as part of the Human
Development Report (HDR), this represents the
one big opportunity for UNDP to bring its mis-
sion of ‘putting people back at the center of
development’ (United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, 1995, p. 11) into public awareness.
Maybe surprisingly, given the importance that
was attached to environmental aspects and to the
concept of sustainable development at the begin-
ning of the 1990s, there have not been many calls
for a ‘greening’ of the HDI. Desai (1995) seems to
be the only one who has developed an ‘index of
intensity of environmental exploitation’ (Desai,
1995, p. 23). It ranks countries similar to the HDI
methodology according to a composite index
comprising greenhouse gas emissions per capita,
water withdrawal as per cent of annual internal
renewable water resources, and energy consump-
tion per unit of GNP. Desai does not, however,
attempt to integrate this index into the HDI itself
and regards his whole enterprise as a tentative
and exploratory exercise which ‘may lead to other
attempts in the future at improving the calcula-
tions or perhaps a prudent abandonment of the
entire exercise’ (Desai, 1995, p. 23).
This paper is concerned about natural resources
and the environment as well. It agrees with Desai
that resource exploitation and environmental
degradation should be integrated into the HDI.
This paper proposes, however, not to include
these aspects into the HDI directly. Rather, they
should be assigned the role of a fundamental
qualification if a country’s achieved level of hu-
man development appears to be unsustainable.
Following this recommendation, it will be argued,
will lead to a more comprehensive linking of the
HDI with sustainability than a modification of the
HDI itself could achieve.
Sagar and Najam (1998, p. 263) state ‘that the
HDI has neglected links to sustainability by fail-
ing to investigate the impact on the natural sys-
tem of the activities that potentially contribute to
national income — and hence to HDI’. They see
a clear need for ‘some mechanism for accounting
over-exploitation of natural resources’ in order
for ‘the HDI to capture the sustainability dimen-
sion of human development’ (Sagar and Najam,
1998). It is the objective of this paper to make a
constructive proposal for the establishment of
such a mechanism.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2
gives an overview on how the HDI is computed
and presents its main critiques so far. Section 3
discusses whether and how the HDI should take
resource exploitation and environmental pollution
into account. It dismisses ‘greening’ the HDI it-
self, i.e. putting yet more variables into the index.
Instead it is shown how conceptualising nature as
natural capital, one of the determining factors of
a country’s sustainability, leads to a more com-
prehensive link with the HDI. Section 4 explains
the methodology used to check whether a coun-
try’s achieved level of human development is sus-
tainable or not. Section 5 presents results for 1998
which is the latest year for which such computa-
tions were possible, indicates for which countries
a qualification of their HDI would have been
warranted and discusses policy implications. Sec-
tion 6 concludes.
2. Critiques of the HDI
To understand the critiques that have been
raised against the HDI, it is necessary to have a
quick look at how it is computed. Without going
into great detail, the HDI is currently calculated
as follows (United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, 2000, p. 269f.):1 for two of the HDI’s
three components a transformed variable is
derived from basic data. For the income compo-
nent a log transformation is applied, in effect
discounting higher incomes due to supposed di-
minishing marginal utility. For the educational
component the transformed variable consists of
two-thirds of the percentage rate of literate adults
among all adults and one-third of the combined
first-, second- and third-level educational gross
enrolment ratio in per cent. The health/longevity
component is directly measured by life expectancy
1 To see how the HDI methodology has changed over time,
refer to McGillivray and White (1993, pp. 183–185) and Hicks
(1997, pp. 1284–1286). For a discussion of how the HDI
relates to other measures, see Doessel and Gounder (1994).
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114 103
at birth in years. For each variable a maximum
and a minimum is defined. An index is then
calculated as follows:
X index=
(actual value−minimum value)
(maximum value−minimum value)
,
X= (Income, Longevity, Education).
This index is calculated for each variable. Until
1994 the minimum and maximum values were not
absolutely fixed but derived from the minimally
and maximally achieved values worldwide in each
year. Then the methodology was changed and the
minimum and maximum values became fixed in
absolute terms. However, since the maximum val-
ues are chosen such that they are higher than or
equal to the actual value a country can possibly
achieve, every country’s index for each variable
lies between zero and one. A country’s HDI is
then simply the arithmetic average of its three
indexes:
HDI=
1
3
(Income index+Longevity index
+Education index).
It follows that the HDI as well lies between
zero and one and countries are ranked according
to how close their HDI is to one. Finally, note
that although the table with the HDI is just one
of many published in each year’s Human Devel-
opment Report, it is also UNDP’s most impor-
tant statistic and is used for grouping countries
together and ranking them in all other tables.2
The HDI has been disputed in many respects.
Desai (1991, p. 356), for example, has criticised
that the three basic indices are added together to
arrive at the HDI, thereby making income, health
and education substitutes. Instead he proposes to
use a log additive form which restricts substi-
tutability. Similarly, and for the same reasons,
Sagar and Najam (1998) propose that the basic
indices must be multiplied to arrive at the HDI.
Most critics, however, have objected to the way
income above the threshold value is heavily dis-
counted. Thus, for example, while in 1995 the
difference between the United States with a real
GDP per capita of 26977 US$ and Uruguay with
6854$ is 20123$, this difference melts down to
210$ after the transformation is undertaken
(United Nations Development Programme, 1998,
p. 128). Acharya and Wall (1994), Gormley
(1995), Noorbakhsh (1998a), Noorbakhsh
(1998b), and Sagar and Najam (1998) have there-
fore published modified HDIs that give more
weight to high incomes. Kelley (1991) and
McGillivray (1991) have even doubted the neces-
sity of a composite index that pays attention to
any other variable than income. In their view, the
ranking according to the HDI is not so funda-
mentally different from a ranking according to
income so that the additional information given
by the HDI is rather negligible. For McGillivray
(1991, p. 1467) the HDI is just ‘yet another redun-
dant composite intercountry development indica-
tor’. Implicitly, a similar critique came from
Dasgupta and Weale (1992) who looked in more
detail at the determinants of well-being for poor
countries.3 Noorbakhsh (1998a) has maintained,
however, that the individual components of the
HDI are not highly correlated with each other,
nor is the index itself highly correlated with any of
its components, so that the HDI cannot be called
redundant.
Still other critics have proposed to widen the
coverage of aspects that comprise the HDI. Hicks
(1997) has proposed to adjust each variable ac-
cording to the inequality of its achievement within
a country and to publish an Inequality-Adjusted
Human Development Index (IAHDI) alongside
the HDI. Indeed, UNDP has once already pub-
lished an HDI for all countries that was adjusted
for income inequality, but not for inequality in
longevity and education (United Nations Devel-
opment Programme, 1994). It also regularly pub-
lishes a gender-related development index which is
basically the HDI adjusted for gender inequality
in achieving income, longevity and education as
well as regional HDIs and long-term time trends
in national HDI for selected countries.
2 Currently, there are three groupings: countries with high
human development (HDI 0.800 and above), medium human
development (HDI 0.500–0.799) and low human development
(HDI below 0.500) (United Nations Development Programme,
2000, p. 249).
3 These authors also criticised the cardinal treatment of
what are essentially ordinal variables.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114104
3. Greening the HDI?
As mentioned, there have not been many calls
for a greening of the HDI. But should natural
resource exploitation and environmental degra-
dation be taken into account in computing the
HDI? The answer must be yes if nature as a
provider of resource input and of pollution as-
similating capacity is taken seriously. More
difficult is to say how it should be taken into
account. An obvious suggestion might be to in-
tegrate one or more variables into the HDI.
However, there are four major reasons why re-
source and environmental issues should not be
integrated into the HDI itself:
First, there is no direct relationship between
resource exploitation and environmental degra-
dation on the one hand and the level of human
development on the other hand. A country with
a high HDI can have high resource exploitation
like Canada or low exploitation like Switzerland.
The same is true vice versa for a country with a
low HDI. A look at the variables proposed by
Desai (1995) makes this clear: whether a country
withdraws 20 or 60% of its internal water re-
sources each year depends a lot on a country’s
geophysical circumstances, but has virtually no
direct impact upon human development.
Equally, whether a country uses energy effi-
ciently or not does not determine its level of
human development. With environmental degra-
dation the link seems to be stronger. But even
there one would have to look at the impacts of
emissions on human development rather than
emissions as such. The ultimate impact would be
on human health, however, which is reflected
already by life expectancy as a proxy. One might
object that life expectancy only reflects damage
to human health after a considerable time lag. If
so, then one should look for a better variable to
replace longevity as a proxy for health achieve-
ment rather than include any environmental
variable.
Second, while the variables included in the
HDI so far are all clear on where improvement
is to be gained — the longer people live, the
better educated they are and the more income
they have, the better — this is in general not
the case for environmental variables. To reduce
water withdrawal from internal renewable water
resources to zero is just not a sensible goal. Nei-
ther is bringing pollution down to zero.
Third, the HDI already consists of variables
that many regard as hardly commensurable. En-
tering a new variable would strengthen the case
of those who claim that the HDI aggregates en-
tities that should better be looked at separately.
It would certainly strengthen Srinivasan’s (1994,
p. 241) critique that the HDI is ‘conceptually
weak’ and that ‘meaningful inferences about the
process of development and performance as well
as policy implications could hardly be drawn
from variations in HDI.’ While Atkinson et al.
(1997, p. 151) are right in saying that ‘given the
unquestionable role of the HDI in raising the
political profile of general health and educa-
tional policies, it seems fitting that there should
be a similar statistical treatment of the environ-
ment’, it is not necessary to enter environmental
variables into the HDI directly. The next section
will make this clear in proposing an alternative
method.
Fourth, any structural change of the HDI will
make comparability over time with former years
impossible. This should be avoided as detecting a
worsening or improving of a country’s HDI over
time is the second biggest objective of the whole
HDI-exercise after ranking countries according to
their level of human development. Indeed, in 1994
UNDP changed its methodology for computing
the HDI to make comparability over time easier.
In earlier reports a country’s index could fall from
one year to another even though its human devel-
opment in every single variable had improved.
Indices from different years were therefore not
meaningfully comparable with each other. The
reason was that, as mentioned above, the maxi-
mum and minimum values, which entered the
indices, were not absolutely fixed but derived
from the maximally and minimally achieved val-
ues worldwide in each year. Only the change in
methodology in 1994 that fixed the maxima and
minima in absolute terms ensured that a country’s
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114 105
index will now always improve if its human devel-
opment improves in absolute terms.4
As an alternative to changing the structure of
the HDI itself, a ‘green HDI’ could be computed
alongside the traditional HDI. However, enough
different HDIs have already been computed
(modified HDI, reformed HDI, gender-related de-
velopment index, inequality adjusted HDI, etc.).
Yet another HDI would presumably generate lit-
tle interest and will not find a lot of attention
alongside the HDI proper.
If resource and environmental aspects should
not be integrated into the HDI itself, how could
they be taken into account then? To answer this
question it is helpful to find out what information
we really want to gain from taking nature into
account. I propose that what we should really be
interested in is not a ranking of countries accord-
ing to some resource or environmental variables,
but the following: is a country’s level of human
development bought at the expense of living off
its natural capital stock, thereby impoverishing its
own future? The 1998 Human Deelopment Report
demands that consumption must be ‘sustainable’
and translates this as not ‘mortgaging the choices
of future generations’ (United Nations Develop-
ment Programme, 1998, p. 1). This paper pro-
poses to do just that: to check whether a given
level of human development is sustainable or not.
To find this out, it does not make any sense to
include yet another variable into the HDI.
Rather, we have to look for the fundament that
allows the achievement of high incomes, healthy
and well-educated people, and to ask whether this
fundament can be maintained or not. Economists
call this fundament ‘capital’, where capital is
defined as a stock that provides current and fu-
ture flows of services. In contrast to neo-classical
economics, capital is to be understood in a broad
sense here, however, encompassing not only man-
ufactured capital, but natural capital as well.
Before the method used in this article is ex-
plained in more detail in the next section, it is
important to point out two things here: first,
strictly speaking the proposed measure of sustain-
ability is assessing the sustainability of the income
component of the HDI only. At the moment there
is no method available that could specifically ad-
dress the sustainability of the other components.
This is somewhat unfortunate because whilst in-
come is the fundament on which private expendi-
tures and public policies for health and education
build upon, there is nevertheless no static link (see
Ranis et al., 2000). At least theoretically it is
possible to improve literacy and educational en-
rolment as well as life expectancy with an unsus-
tainable income stream and indeed with falling
income levels if only more and more of the in-
come is spent on health and education. But in the
long run this cannot be sustainable as it cannot be
prolonged indefinitely. In this sense, while the
proposed sustainability check is strictly speaking
one of the income component only, sooner or
later the achievements on the non-income compo-
nents of the HDI become unsustainable as well if
countries fail to pass the sustainability check pro-
posed in this article.
Second, readers familiar with the debates on
national income accounting and sustainability will
have noticed that this section’s discussion has its
parallel in similar controversies on whether sus-
tainability corrections of the national income ac-
counting systems should take place in side (or
satellite) accounts or in the accounting system
itself. It would be beyond the scope of this paper
to analyse these controversies here. Suffice it to
say that most scholars seem to agree that, there as
well, sustainability corrections are best left to the
satellite accounts (see, Nordhaus and Kokkelen-
berg, 1999; United Nations, 2000). The reasons
are not identical to the ones suggested in this
article, of course, given the different points of
reference. But, without going into any detail, it is
probably fair to say that with respect to national
income accounting as well the majority view is
that more would be lost than gained if the sus-
tainability corrections were undertaken in the ac-
counts themselves since those accounts have their
own proper role to play.
4 It can still happen, of course, that a country’s human
development improves and its HDI improves, but its ranking
according to HDI in comparison to other countries worsens.
This will be the case if the other countries are doing still better
in improving their human development.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114106
4. A proposed method for assessing the
sustainability of the indicated human development
How do we know whether a country maintains
its capital or not? One possibility is to look at
whether ‘genuine saving’5 is positive, for which
World Bank (2000) has provided a data set for
155 countries covering the period 1970–1998.6 To
understand the derivation of genuine saving, one
needs to go in steps. One starts with a country’s
gross domestic investment. Then, World Bank
(2000) subtracts net foreign borrowing and adds
net official transfers to arrive at what it calls gross
domestic saving:7
Gross domestic saving
=gross domestic investment−net foreign borr-
owing+official transfers.
Then one subtracts the net depreciation of the
country’s manufactured capital stock in order to
arrive at net saving:
Net saving=gross saving−depreciation of
manufactured capital.
Finally, net depreciation of a country’s natural
capital stock is subtracted to arrive at ‘genuine
saving’:
Genuine saving=net saving−depreciation of
natural capital.
The World Bank has estimated data on invest-
ment, depreciation of manufactured capital and
rents from resource exploitation. Depreciation of
natural capital in principle consists of two parts:
valuation of pollution damage for pollution be-
yond the regenerative capacity of the environment
and depreciation of the natural resource stock.
Ideally, one would want to include a value for
pollutants that affect the domestic environment.
Unfortunately, no comprehensive data set exists
for such pollutants. The only pollutant included
so far in the World Bank data set is carbon
dioxide which is valued at 20 US$ per metric
tonne of carbon. The value is taken from
Fankhauser (1995) and is often regarded as a
consensus estimate. The damage caused by carbon
dioxide emissions is attributed to the emitting
country. However, the accumulation of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere is the quintessential
example of a public bad. The damage from car-
bon dioxide emissions inflicted upon the capital
stock of a country depends not on the country’s
emissions, but on all countries emissions. And, of
course, some countries will be more affected by
global warming than others. I have therefore
taken out the valuation of carbon dioxide emis-
sions from the genuine saving computations. The
reader should note that analysis of the data in
World Bank (2000) shows that net depreciation of
the natural capital stock due to resource exploita-
tion dominates depreciation due to carbon diox-
ide emissions by orders of magnitude. The basic
results reported in the next section will therefore
not change much if the value of carbon dioxide
emissions was included.
As concerns natural capital depreciation due to
resource extraction, the following resources are
included: oil, natural gas, hard coal, brown coal,
bauxite, copper, iron, lead, nickel, zinc, phos-
phate, tin, gold, silver, and forests. As can be
seen, the database is strong on non-renewable
resources since for these marketed resources price
and cost as well as extraction data are not too
difficult to get hold of. The harvesting of forests is
the only renewable resource taken into account so
far.
How to measure depreciation of the natural
resource stock? This is not easy to answer as there
5 The term ‘genuine’ saving was introduced by Kirk Hamil-
ton (1994) to distinguish it from traditional net saving mea-
sures which included only depreciation of manufactured
capital. For formal demonstrations that genuine saving mea-
sures sustainability, see Hamilton (1994), Hamilton and Atkin-
son (1996) and Neumayer (1999).
6 Countries missing are mainly small countries due to lack of
data.
7 Note that the Bank prefers to assess sustainability in terms
of saving rather than investment, which is why it subtracts net
foreign borrowing and adds net official transfers. This is
somewhat unfortunate as what really matters for sustainability
is investment, not saving, but we stick to the Bank’s methodol-
ogy here for lack of alternative data. Also, if we are really
interested in productive investment in manufactured capital,
ideally one might want to take out inventory investment.
Current data availability does not allow doing so, however.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114 107
is no universally agreed method to do this. How-
ever, I have proposed elsewhere that the so-called
‘El Serafy’-method is a good method to use (Neu-
mayer, 2000). The formula for the ‘El Serafy’-
method is derived from the following reasoning
(El Serafy, 1981, 1989, 1991): receipts from non-
renewable resource extraction should not fully
count as (sustainable)8 income because resource
extraction leads to a lowering of the resource
stock and thus brings with it an element of depre-
ciation of the resource capital stock. (The same
reasoning applies to renewable resource stocks if
harvesting exceeds natural regeneration.) While
the receipts from the resource stock will end at
some finite time, sustainable income by definition
must last forever. Hence, sustainable income is
that part of resource rents which if received infi-
nitely would have a present value just equal to the
present value of the finite stream of resource rents
over the lifetime of the resource.
Let P be the resource price, AC average extrac-
tion cost, R the amount of resource extracted (or
harvested beyond regeneration), r the discount
rate and n the number of remaining years of the
resource stock if extraction was the same in the
future as in the base year, i.e. n is the reserves to
extraction ratio. Let us define resource rents as
RR (P−AC) R. Clearly, these resource rents
will become zero in some finite period of time
given that the resource is non-renewable (or, if
renewable, the resource is harvested beyond re-
generation). If extraction was the same in the
future as in the present and the overall amount of
reserves stayed the same, then n is the number of
years after which the resource rents will disap-
pear. The present value of RR is therefore equal
to:9

n
i=0
RR
(1+r)i
=
RR{1− [1/(1+r)n+1]}
1− (1/1+r)
. (1)
The reader should note that resource discover-
ies enter the formula via changing n for the next
year. More generally, it is important to see that
the formula is to be updated each year with the
information available at the time. The ‘El Serafy’-
method is flexible and does not assume that re-
source extractors are locked into a particular,
static extraction profile over the entire future of
resource extraction.
Contrary to resource receipts, sustainable in-
come (SI) by definition has to accrue forever. The
present value of an infinite stream of SI is
therefore10


i=0
SI
(1+r)i
=
SI(1+r)
r
=
SI
1− (1/1+r)
. (2)
Next, if we set Eqs. (1) and (2) equal to each
other, and rearrange the expression to have SI on
the left-hand side of the equation, we can see
which fraction of RR is truly sustainable in the
sense that it represents the income that can be
achieved infinitely, whereas the full amount of RR
accrues only for a finite period of time:
SI=RR

1−
1
(1+r)n+1
n
. (3)
Hence the difference between resource rents RR
and SI — that is, the fraction of RR that repre-
sents sustainable income — is the true deprecia-
tion of the resource stock. The correction term,
representing this depreciation of the resource
stock, would thus be
(RR−SI)=RR
 1
(1+r)n+1
n
= (P−AC) R
 1
(1+r)n+1
n
. (4)
If r0 and n0, then depreciation is only a
fraction of total resource rents (P−AC) R. The
next section reports which countries’ human de-
velopment appears to be unsustainable if depreci-
ation of the natural resource stock is computed
8 Note that I have put the word sustainable in brackets here
since in Hicks’ (1946, p. 172) classical exposition income, by
definition, must be sustainable or otherwise it does not count
as income: ‘‘We ought to define a man’s income as the
maximum value which he can consume during a week, and still
expect to be as well off at the end of the week as he was at the
beginning’’.
9 By assumption, RR accrue at the beginning of the account-
ing period. If RR accrue at the end of the accounting period,
then n+1 in Eq. (1) would be replaced by n.
10 Note that n has been replaced with the sign for infinity in
Eq. (2) to account for the fact that SI must accrue for an
infinite time period.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114108
with the ‘El Serafy’-method. Before doing so,
however, it has to be clarified to which country
resource exploitation should be attributed. Poor
developing countries with high resource exploita-
tion could claim that these resources go to rich
developed countries for their benefit and that
therefore the rich countries should be blamed if
resource exploitation is unsustainable. Indeed, the
1998 Human Deelopment Report (United Nations
Development Programme, 1998) stresses over and
over again the unequal consumption pattern of
natural resources. Nevertheless, resource exploita-
tion should be attributed to the extracting country
itself and not to the consuming country. This is
because the purpose of resource accounting is to
try to measure whether and by how much the
natural capital stock of a country is changing. It
simply does not matter who is ‘responsible’ for its
growth or decline.11 Of course, once it has been
established that a country’s natural capital stock
is declining and that this might represent a prob-
lem for sustainability of its development, the
question of who is ‘responsible’ for the resource
extraction will come back on the agenda. But it is
an entirely different question to which we will
come back later.
Depreciation of the natural resource stock
needs to be computed for all those countries
which, according to World Bank (2000), have a
positive net saving rate and resource rents that are
big enough to potentially make their genuine sav-
ing rate negative:12 Bolivia, Congo, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Mauritania, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman13, Russia,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Togo, United Arab Emi-
rates, Uzbekistan and Venezuela. To compute
depreciation we have to find out which resources
these countries mainly exploit. The answer is
given in Table 1, which breaks down total re-
source rents into the percentage share attributable
to individual resources.14
Unfortunately, forestry had to be excluded
from the calculations due to the many difficulties
in getting reliable data about forest stocks. For
Ethiopia, Gambia, Nepal and partly for Ghana
and Togo resource rents therefore counted fully
towards natural capital depreciation, thus over-
stating depreciation in these countries. Note, how-
ever, that the World Bank (2000) data do take
into account reforestation if it takes place. For the
other resources, Appendix A explains where the
extraction and reserves data came from. For the
calculations a relatively low discount rate of 4%
p.a. was applied following the rate which World
Bank (1997) uses for wealth estimations.
5. Results and policy implications
The overall results are shown in Table 2 where
countries are sorted according to their rank in the
1998 HDI. A whole range of countries marked
with a ‘a’ appear to be unsustainable because they
exhibit negative net saving rates. For these coun-
tries it was not necessary to compute depreciation
of the natural capital stock. These countries are
unsustainable simply because they already eat up
their stock of manufactured capital. The rest of
the countries in Table 2 do not have negative net
saving rates. But what happens to these countries
after taking into account depreciation of natural
capital as well? The following countries also be-
come unsustainable: Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Mauritania, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Syria and
Togo. The HDI of all these countries together
with those that exhibit negative net saving rates is
therefore qualified as ‘potentially unsustainable’.
A common feature for most of these countries
that become unsustainable if depreciation of their
natural capital stock is taken into account is that
they have relatively low reserves to extraction
ratios: for oil it is about 30 years for Nigeria, 16
years for Oman and 12 years for Syria. Togo has
11 I am thankful to an anonymous referee who prompted me
to clarify this point.
12 In the following, saving rates are defined as saving divided
by GNP.
13 Due to lack of more recent data, data from 1994 had to
be used in the case of Oman.
14 Note that Table 1 gives the breakdown of resources as
they are recorded in World Bank (2000). Minor extraction of
other resources taking place in actual reality is likely to remain
unrecorded.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114 109
Table 1
Breakdown of total resource rents into percentage share attributable to individual resources
Source: own computations from World Bank (2000).
a reserves to extraction ratio for phosphate of
only about 14 years. In contrast, countries with
huge reserves to extraction ratios do not become
unsustainable if depreciation of natural capital is
taken into account. This was to be expected as a
high reserves to extraction ratio means that only a
small share of the total resource stock is used up
by current resource extraction. Russia, for exam-
ple, has a reserves to extraction ratio for natural
gas of more than 80 years. Iran has a ratio for oil
of 65 years, Kuwait and the United Arab Emi-
rates more than 100 years, Saudi Arabia 80 years
and Venezuela 60 years. Only Kazakhstan’s ratio
is somewhat intermediate at 37 years. Falling out
of this picture is Mauritania, which has a very
high reserves to extraction ratio for iron ore of
over 60 years, but whose net saving is so low that
its genuine saving rate becomes negative.
What is the lesson to be learnt for those coun-
tries with positive net saving rates but negative
genuine saving rates? Most of these countries in
the past did not adequately use the opportunities
they were given through their natural resource
endowment to build up and maintain manufac-
tured capital in exchange for resource depletion.
Nature endowed them with a free gift in the form
of natural resource stocks. But instead of using
this asset wisely and seizing the opportunity to
achieve a level of human development that is
sustainable into the future, too large a share of
resource rents is wasted in unproductive expendi-
tures and consumption instead of invested in
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114110
Table 2
Net savings rates and genuine savings rates according to the ‘El Serafy’-method
Net savings rate (%)Rank in 1998 HDI Genuine savings rate (‘El Serafy’-method) (%)Country
High human deelopment (rank 1–46)
−5.6523 n.a.cIsraela
Medium human deelopment (rank 47–139)
50 −3.38Trinidad and Tobagoa n.a.
−0.02Romaniaa n.a.64
Macedoniaa69 −1.75 n.a.
−14.0570 n.a.Georgiaa
−23.05Lebanona n.a.82
Omanb86 12.19 −1.31
−9.23 n.a.90 Azerbaijana
−5.32Jordana n.a.92
−22.4593 n.a.Armeniaa
−15.35Albaniaa n.a.94
Kyrgyzstana98 −5.21 n.a.
−10.24Moldovaa n.a.102
El Salvadora104 −5.32 n.a.
Syriab111 15.09 −0.99
−6.46Nicaraguaa n.a.116
Guatemalaa120 −1.59 n.a.
−50.12127 n.a.Lesothoa
5.66Ghanab −0.81129
Cambodiaa136 −1.54 n.a.
138 −0.75Kenyaa n.a.
Low human deelopment (rank 140–174)
−1.64 n.a.141 Madagascara
6.08Nepalb −3.72144
145 0.16Togob −5.05
0.51Mauritaniab −0.84147
Yemena148 −4.65 n.a.
150 −8.82Haitia n.a.
4.49Nigeriab −2.06151
Zambiaa153 −2.02 n.a.
−1.57158 n.a.Ugandaa
−35.48Eritreaa n.a.159
Gambiab161 0.11 −9.37
−6.06163 n.a.Malawia
−8.77Rwandaa n.a.164
Central African Republica166 −2.75 n.a.
−4.27167 n.a.Chada
−5.19Mozambiquea n.a.168
Guinea-Bissaua169 −15.46 n.a.
−8.81 n.a.170 Burundia
0.40Ethiopiab −11.00171
Nigera173 −3.37 n.a.
−8.05 n.a.174 Sierra Leonea
Own computations from World Bank (2000) and sources indicated in Appendix A.
a ‘Potentially unsustainable’ because of negative net saving rates.
b ‘Potentially unsustainable’ because of negative genuine saving rates.
c n.a., not applicable.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114 111
manufactured capital. They should learn from
their mistake for the future depletion of their
remaining reserves.
But it is not just bad resource management that
puts the human development of these countries at
risk. Unsustainability is often the more general
consequence of low saving rates. As World World
Bank (1997, p. 35) puts it: ‘‘The depressed rates of
genuine saving (…) represent an opportunity not
seized. (…) [I]t is often the gross saving effort that
is insufficient in these countries, which prompts
the finger squarely at broader macroeconomic
policies’’. It is outside the scope of this paper to
discuss in detail policies that can raise a country’s
gross saving rate. Suffice it to say here that in-
creased public savings and a fully funded pensions
scheme are likely to raise the saving rate in the
long run (World Bank, 1999).
Note that it is not implied here that these
countries should be left on their own in their
struggle to become sustainable. This is for two
reasons: first, often unsustainable resource extrac-
tion as well as wasteful military and other expen-
ditures are encouraged by developed countries
who want to import resources as cheaply as possi-
ble and to export military and other goods as
much as possible.15 Second, looking back at Table
2 shows that countries with low and lower
medium human development are particularly
likely to be unsustainable. Without help from the
outside, it is most likely that not only will they be
unable to improve their human development, but
they also risk losing the little development they
have since even this low level is unsustainable. In
conclusion, while the results reported here make a
clear case for macroeconomic policy and resource
management reforms, they can also be interpreted
as a call for assistance to countries with a low
HDI and signs of unsustainability. This assistance
needs to be designed such that policies move
towards better resource management and higher
saving rate, however. Merely granting countries
better access to foreign financing can even reduce
a nation’s saving rate, if aid flows finance con-
sumption instead of productive investments.
6. Conclusions
This paper made a constructive proposal on
how to link the HDI with sustainability. It has
argued that natural resources and the environ-
ment are best taken into account not in placing
yet another variable into the HDI or calculating a
‘green HDI’ alongside the traditional index.
Rather, the question of sustainability should be
seen as a fundamental one and the achieved level
of human development should be qualified as
‘potentially unsustainable’ where appropriate.
Following this proposal would pay due regard to
the role of natural capital as one of the enabling
factors for human development. It would also
allow continuing with the traditional index and
would not inhibit comparisons with former years.
As Trabold-Nu¨bler (1991, p. 243) suggests,
whenever possible ‘a change in the structure of the
HDI should be avoided in order to assure com-
parability over time’.
What are the limitations of this constructive
proposal to link the HDI with sustainability?
First, the coverage of renewable resources needs
to be extended if enough data of sufficient quality
can be established. Forests are an important re-
newable resource, but not the only one.16 If possi-
ble, resources like water, soil, fish and, more
generally, biodiversity should be included.
Second, the current non-accounting for capital
depreciation due to pollution is far from satisfac-
tory. Ideally one would want to value the damage
inflicted by pollutants like sulphur oxides, nitro-
gen oxides, fecal coliforms and particulate matter
directly. That the more developed countries by
and large do not become detected as potentially
unsustainable is mostly to be explained by their
usually quite high net saving rates. Nevertheless,
these countries would no longer have such out-
standingly good sustainability performance if
more pollutants were taken into account. United
Nations Development Programme (1998, p. 66) is
correct in arguing that ‘it is the rich who pollute
16 Even forests could not be adequately included in the
computations above as the full amount of resource rents from
forest harvesting was counted as depreciation, thus overstating
the true amount of depreciation.
15 For an early analysis of this phenomenon, see El Serafy
(1981).
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114112
more (…) who generate more waste and put more
stress on nature’s sink’. Whether it will be possi-
ble in the near future to have reliable data on a
broad range of pollutants and on the damage
caused by their emission is far from clear,
however.
Third, the coverage of countries in the World
Bank database has to be extended and needs to be
matched with the HDI database so as to include
all countries that are covered by the HDI. It will
only make sense to indicate potential unsustain-
ability of the achieved human development if this
exercise is undertaken for all countries.
Fourth, use of the ‘El Serafy’-method necessi-
tates the choice of a rate of discount, which is a
contentious issue. Different conclusions on the
sustainability of a country follow from using dif-
ferent discount rates — see Neumayer (2000) for
more detail. Note, however, that various parame-
ters have to be chosen for the construction of the
HDI itself as well so that this problem is not
exclusive to the proposal made here.
Fifth, for technical reasons that cannot be ex-
plained here, negative genuine saving rates in one
year do not necessarily imply unsustainability
(Asheim, 1994; Pezzey and Withagen, 1995). Only
if these rates are ‘persistently’ negative can unsus-
tainability be inferred. Also, given the sometimes
shaky quality of the data, one must be precau-
tious about making strong assertions. These are
essentially the reasons why it was proposed to
qualify the achieved human development of a
country that exhibits negative genuine saving
rates in one year with ‘potentially unsustainable’
rather than a definite ‘unsustainable’.
Sixth, the concept of sustainability employed
here is that of so-called weak sustainability which
implicitly assumes substitutability between natural
and other forms of capital (Neumayer, 1999). It
can therefore not be taken into account that a
natural resource might be ‘critical’ in the sense
that the achieved level of human development is
endangered if this resource is run down even
though enough other forms of capital are built up
in exchange to make genuine saving positive.
Seventh, the analysis here takes into account an
important form of capital, namely natural capital.
Of course, there exist other forms of capital such
as human or social capital. Unfortunately, the
change in these other forms of capital cannot at
the moment be measured with sufficient precision,
so that they were ignored here. It should be
pointed out, however, that natural capital (con-
trary to, for example, human capital) is really
under siege and in this respect more important for
sustainability assessments.
All these limitations notwithstanding, it is im-
portant to take nature into account when one
assesses human development. This paper has
made the first step and proposed a method for
linking the HDI with sustainability. Other steps
should follow and a lot of work still needs to be
done especially with regard to improving the data-
base and the coverage of resources and pollutants.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank two referees as well as
Diane Perrons and Sylvia Chant for many very
helpful comments. All errors are mine. An earlier
version of this paper was presented at the Ninth
Annual Conference of the European Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists in
Oslo.
Appendix A. Sources of data for computing net
depreciation of natural capital according to the
‘El Serafy’-method
To compute user costs for resource extraction
according to the ‘El Serafy’-method, one needs to
establish four different terms:
 P−AC, net resource price;
 R, resource extraction;
 r, the discount rate;
 n, the number of years reserves would last at
current extraction rates (reserves to extraction
ratio).
(P−AC) as well as R were taken directly from
World Bank (2000). The discount rate was as-
sumed to be 4% p.a. This is the rate World Bank
(1997) uses for wealth estimations (for a justifica-
tion, see Kunte et al. (1998, p. 8f). The reserves to
extraction ratios came from various data sources
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114 113
depending on the particular resource. Note that
for quite a few countries it proved to be sufficient
to get reserve to extraction ratio data for their
major resources (usually oil and natural gas), as it
became already apparent that they would achieve
positive genuine saving rates. There was therefore
no need to search for reserve ratio data for their
minor resources. Reserves to extraction ratios for
oil and natural gas came from British Petroleum
(2000), those for iron and phosphate from U.S.
Bureau of Mines (2000). For Ghana, the 1998
ratio had to be computed indirectly as world
reserves in 1998 times Ghana’s 1994 share of 1994
world reserves divided by Ghana’s 1998 extraction
(all data from U.S. Bureau of Mines (2000), apart
from Ghana’s 1994 share which was provided by
George J. Coackley, the U.S. Bureau of Mines’
country expert for Ghana).
References
Acharya, A., Wall, H.J., 1994. An evaluation of the United
Nations’ human development index. J. of Econ. and Soc.
Meas. 20, 51–65.
Asheim, G.B., 1994. Net national product as an indicator of
sustainability. Scand. J. of Econ. 96, 257–265.
Atkinson, G., Dubourg, R., Hamilton, K., Munasinghe, M.,
Pearce, D., Young, C., 1997. Measuring Sustainable Devel-
opment — Macroeconomics and the Environment. Ed-
ward Elgar, Cheltenham.
British Petroleum, 2000. BP Statistical Review of World En-
ergy, British Petroleum, London.
Dasgupta, P., Weale, M., 1992. On measuring the quality of
life. World Dev. 20, 119–131.
Desai, M., 1991. Human development — concepts and mea-
surement. Eur. Econ. Rev. 35, 350–357.
Desai, M., 1995. Greening of the HDI? In: McGillivray, A.
(Ed.), Accounting for Change. The New Economics Foun-
dation, London, pp. 21–36.
Doessel, D.P., Gounder, R., 1994. Theory and measurement
of living levels: some empirical results for the human
development index. J. of Intern. Dev. 6, 415–435.
El Serafy, S., 1981. Absorptive capacity, the demand for
revenue, and the supply of petroleum. J. of Energy and
Dev. 7, 73–88.
El Serafy, S., 1989. The proper calculation of income from
depletable natural resources. In: Ahmad, Y.J., El Serafy,
S., Lutz, E. (Eds.), Environmental Accounting for Sustain-
able Development: a UNDP — World Bank symposium.
The World Bank, Wasington DC, pp. 10–18.
El Serafy, S., 1991. The environment as capital. In: Costanza,
R. (Ed.), Ecological Economics: The Science and Manage-
ment of Sustainability. Columbia University Press, New
York, pp. 168–175.
Fankhauser, S., 1995. Valuing Climate Change: The Econom-
ics of the Greenhouse. Earthscan, London.
Gormley, P.J., 1995. The human development index in 1994:
impact of income on country rank. J. of Econ. and Soc.
Meas. 21, 253–267.
Hamilton, K., 1994. Green adjustments to GDP. Resour.
Policy 20, 155–168.
Hamilton, K., Atkinson, G., 1996. Air pollution and green
accounts. Energy Policy 24, 675–684.
Hicks, J.R., 1946). Value and Capital. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Hicks, D.A., 1997. The inequality-adjusted human develop-
ment index: a constructive proposal. World Dev. 25, 1283–
1298.
Kelley, A.C., 1991. The human development index: ‘handle
with care’. Population and Development Review 17, 315–
324.
Kunte, A., Hamilton, K., Dixon, J., Clemens, M., 1998.
Estimating National Wealth — Methodology and Results,
The World Bank, Washington DC.
McGillivray, M., 1991. The human development index: yet
another redundant composite development indicator?
World Dev. 19, 1461–1468.
McGillivray, M., White, H., 1993. Measuring development?
The UNDP’s human development index. J. of Intern. Dev.
5, 183–192.
Neumayer, E., 1999. Weak versus Strong Sustainability: Ex-
ploring the Limits of Two Opposing Paradigms. Edward
Elgar, Cheltenham and Northampton.
Neumayer, E., 2000. Resource accounting in measures of
unsustainability: challenging the World Bank’s conclu-
sions. Environ. and Resour. Econ. 15, 257–278.
Noorbakhsh, F., 1998a. A modified human development in-
dex. World Dev. 26, 517–528.
Noorbakhsh, F., 1998b. The human development index: some
technical issues and alternative indices. J. of Intern. Dev.
10, 589–605.
Nordhaus, W.D., Kokkelenberg, E.C. (Eds.), 1999. Nature’s
Numbers. Expanding the national economic accounts to
include the environment. Panel on Integrated Environmen-
tal and Economic Accounting, Committee on National
Statistics. National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Pezzey, J., Withagen, C., 1995. Single-Peakedness and Initial
Sustainability in Capital–Resource Economies, Depart-
ment of Economics Discussion Paper Nr. 95-09, University
College London.
Ranis, G., Stewart, F., Ramirez, A., 2000. Economic growth
and human development. World Dev. 28, 197–219.
Sagar, A.D., Najam, A., 1998. The human development index:
a critical review. Ecol. Econ. 25, 249–264.
Srinivasan, T.N., 1994. Human development: a new paradigm
or reinvention of the wheel? Am. Econ. Rev., Papers and
Proc. 84, 238–243.
E. Neumayer / Ecological Economics 39 (2001) 101–114114
Trabold-Nu¨bler, H., 1991. The Human Development Index —
A New Development. Intereconomics, September/October,
pp. 236–243.
U.S. Bureau of Mines, 2000. Mineral Commodity Summaries,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Wasington, DC.
United Nations, 2000. Integrated Environmental and Eco-
nomic Accounting: An Operational Manual, United Na-
tions, New York.
United Nations Development Programme, various years. Hu-
man Development Report, Oxford University Press, New
York.
World Bank, 1997. Expanding the Measure of Wealth: Indica-
tors of Environmentally Sustainable Development, The
World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank, 1999. Why Do Savings Rates Vary Across
Countries? World Bank Policy and Research Bulletin, 10.
World Bank, 2000. Excel 5.0-File Containing Savings Data,
The World Bank, Washington, DC.

