We chose the politically relevant population (contiguous dyads plus all dyads containing 
a major power) because it sets a hard test for prediction.  Omitting all distant dyads composed of 
weak states means we omit much of the influence that variables not very amenable to policy 
intervention (distance and national power) would exert in the full data set; by that omission we 
make our job harder by reducing the predictive power of such variables, but also make it more 
interesting.  By applying the training and cross-validation sampling technique we show that a 
strong performance is achieved even when the analysis is restricted to the politically relevant 
group.  By focusing only on dyads that either involve major powers or are contiguous, we test 
the discriminative power of the neural network on a difficult set of cases.19  The neural network 
system is fed with only highly informative data since every dyad can be deemed to be at risk of 
incurring a dispute, yet it is harder for the network to discriminate between the two classes 
(dyad-years with disputes and those without disputes) because the politically relevant group is 
more homogeneous (e.g., closer, more interdependent) than the all-dyad data set.  If the balanced 
training with cross–validation correction strategy outperforms the other techniques with these 


16 
data, by providing models that can successfully generalize in different timeframes, it should also 
be successful for researchers who wish to consider the entire population of dyads.20  
The unit of analysis is the dyad-year.  There are a total of 27,737 cases in the cold war 
population, with 26,845 non-dispute dyad-years and 892 dispute dyad-years.  The pre-cold war 
population comprises 11,686 cases, with 11,271 non-dispute dyads and 415 dispute dyads.  The 
dependent variable (Dispute), or network output, is 1 if a militarized interstate dispute (MID) 
was begun and 0 otherwise.  Only dyads with no dispute or with only the initial year of the 
militarized conflict are included, since our concern is to predict the onset of a conflict rather than 
its continuation.  Other investigations (e.g., Bennett and Stam 2000a, Russett and Oneal 2001) 
find substantial commonality between the influences on dispute initiation and dispute 
continuation, but it is best not to assume their similarity, so we limit ourselves to the former.
The CW data is used to generate three training sets (Balanced Training, Balanced-

Replicated Training, and Unbalanced Training), five cross-validation sets (CV prior correction 
I, CV prior correction II, CV no correction III, CV no correction IV, and CV no correction V) 
and five testing sets (CW Test I, CW Test II, CW Test III, CW Test IV, and CW Test V) according 
to the different training strategies and their relative sampling rules.  The size of these sets varies 
slightly for each training strategy, as more or fewer dyads are needed to satisfy sampling 
requirements.  Another testing set, PCW Test, comprises the complete population of the pre-cold 
war period.  The training tests are used to fit the model through the backpropagation learning 
algorithm, the cross-validation tests determine the end of the training (fitting) process, and the 
error matrices of the testing sets measure the accuracy of each training strategy.  Since one 
objective is to determine whether the pattern discovered by the neural networks for the cold war 
period can also explain the pre-cold war period, only CW data are used in the training and cross-



17 
validation set, while the PCW cases are used only as a testing set.  The difference in accuracy 
between the CW and PCW testing sets, achieved by the different training strategies, gives us a 
measure of stability for the CW model.  Similar accuracy for the two periods means that the 
relationships at work during the cold war were already in place during the previous era.
The Balanced Training set contains a randomly predefined equal number of conflict and 
non-conflict cases.  In the Balanced-Replicated Training set we replicated the number of conflict 
cases of the Balanced Training set once and then randomly selected an equal number of non-

conflict  cases to match the duplicated conflict observations.21  Finally, the Unbalanced Training 
set comprises an uneven number of conflict and non-conflict cases randomly sampled from the 
CW population.  This last training set is almost half of the entire CW population.  By selecting 
such a large training sample we can show empiricall that, quite differently from multivariate 
statistical techniques, in neural networks the rare event bias does not decrease in large samples.22 
For the cross-validation phase we generated two sets (CV prior correction I and CV prior 
correction II) reproducing the class frequency in the CW population for use as prior correction 
for the two balanced training sets (Balanced Training and Balanced-Replicated Training).  In 
this case, the non-conflict class represents 97 percent of the population, while the conflict class is 
only 3 percent.  The remaining cross-validation sets (CV no correction III, CV no correction IV,
The partial correlation cannot easily be explained as spurious, simply reflecting some specific individual characteristics of people who spend a lot of time in front of the TV. A large set of socio-demographic characteristics that are systematically related with reported life satisfaction and might as well be with TV consumption is taken into consideration. These characteristics include, e.g., respondents’ age, sex, nationality, marital status, household income, level of education, and employment status. The correlation of these variables with reported life satisfaction is discussed in various literature surveys (see, e.g. Frey & Stutzer, 2002b). Specifically for the ESS, the determinants of life satisfaction are discussed in Lelkes (2006).
Partial correlations of other factors with life satisfaction allow for the assessment of the size of the effect of TV consumption in relative terms. For example, the difference in life satisfaction between those watching more than 2.5 h and those watching less than half an hour (0.18) is more than one third of the difference in life satisfaction between people who have never been married and are without a partner and married people (0.53). The difference is about the same as the one between people having upper secondary education and those who simply completed primary school or the first stage of basic education (0.19).
5.2. Integration into the literature and discussion 
The basic results supplement the existing studies looking at the utility of TV consumption. Two approaches can be distinguished. The first captures the short run or instant effects by measuring ‘‘Activity Enjoyment Ratings’’. In the context of time use studies, individuals are asked to rate TV viewing compared to other leisure time activities. In the United States, in 1985, with a rating of 7.8 on a scale from 0 to 10, it proved to be valued somewhat higher than the average enjoyment of 7 derived from other activities. Nevertheless, it ranks lower than most other activities undertaken in leisure time (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, p. 243). On the index of positive affect of 900 Texan women constructed by Kahneman, Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, and Stone (2004), TV ranks with 4.2 (on a scale from 0 to 6) roughly in the middle of all activities. With 2.2 h per day, it is one of the most time consuming activities of these women. With the Experience Sampling Method, participants are randomly asked how they feel at a particular moment in time, using a beeper or a hand-held computer. On the affect scale, composed of cheerfulness, friendliness, happiness, and sociability, TV viewing is located in the lower part of the scale and can hardly be distinguished from reading, working, hobbies and idling. Eating, social contacts, sports and sex, on the other hand, are clearly higher ranked. Nevertheless, individuals have little inclination to do anything else (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). This short-run evaluation captures the momentary affect, but it is difficult to determine the utility individuals would have derived had they done something else.
294 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


In a second approach, long-run aspects of the utility derived from TV consumption are captured. In a survey on the general satisfaction with TV undertaken in the United States in 1975, TV was given an average rating of 5.9 points on an enjoyment scale ranging from 0 to 10. It ranks considerably behind most other leisure time activities and below the average of 6.8 of all rated activities. In 1995, TV viewing with 4.8 points ranked even lower when compared to all other leisure time pursuits (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, pp. 243, 250). In these surveys, TV viewing is generally rated much lower than in surveys capturing instant utility hinting at possible time-inconsistent preferences. Yet, such surveys are faced with the problem that watching TV is associated with a low (‘‘couch potato’’) image, and there is a general consensus that many programs are stupid. For that reason, the answers given may reflect what is taken to be socially desirable. It should be noted that surveys on general life satisfaction (as used in our study) are not affected by this bias.
We assume that, like presence, social presence is a phenomenal state  
varying during the course of an interaction.  It is a fleeting, variable judgment of  
the nature of interaction with the other, as limited or augmented by the medium.
But clearly there is a boundary between this temporary and fluctuating state over  
the course of an interaction, and some longer-term judgment one might make  
about the other. What individuals feel, for example, about the President of the  
United States should be independent on how present they might feel with him  
should they have the fortune of communicating with him via an email, a telephone  


    
26  
call, a teleconference, or a face-to-face meeting. Measures of longer-term attitudes  
about the interaction agent, in this case the President, need to be kept independent  
of temporal judgments of social presence with the interactant. Put differently, social  
presence is a highly dynamic and transient state that is defined in relation to  
another entity, but is independent of judgments about that entity.
Some measures, including ones that we ourselves have used, may cross the  
line toward representing variables that are correlates or effects of social presence  
rather than social presence per se. The use of measures of user-other similarity  
(for example, “homophilly,”  McCroskey, Richmond et al., 1975) provides an  
example.  If such measures are used to assess transient judgments about how  
connected a person is feeling toward a target entity, it is probably tapping into the  
social presence construct. But if it is merely measuring a summative judgment  
about whether the target has characteristics similar to the actor, it is probably  
better regarded as a social judgment.
Social presence as measurement of a medium versus a phenomenal state  
When we measure social presence, what are we measuring: (1) the  
fluctuating phenomenal properties of a communication interaction and the  
relationship it establishes between actor and target, or (2) stable properties of a  
medium and/or target?  Many telecommunication and human-computer  
interaction researchers are interested in the latter.  But we submit that social  
presence measures should measure the former, a transient phenomenological state  
that varies with medium, knowledge of the other, content of the communication,
environment, and social context.


    
27  
Consider the most widely used measure of social presence (Short, Williams  
et al., 1976).  This is explicitly a measure of the medium, which may be the result  
of the funding rather than theory. The UK post office, Department of  
Transportation, General Electric, and other organizations funded their earlier studies  
to determine the relative effectiveness of different media channels for social  
communication. After discussing the social psychological states of users of these  
telecommunication technologies, Short, Williams, and Christie proceed to  
operationalize their concept of social presence as a business consumer’s “attitude  
about a medium” and its use for negotiation, persuasion, and other forms of  
organizational communication. This is based on the reasonable assumption that  
individuals have certain attitudes towards media channels and what they consider  
appropriate for social presence. They considered social presence to be  
unidimensional “quality of the medium” and not the interaction of individual  
differences, task, and environmental context. They stated that social presence, “…is  
conceived of as unidimensional but considered to be a perceptual or attitudinal  
dimension of the user…{and thus is} a subjective quality of the medium.” (Short,
We argue that economic imaginaries have a crucial constitutive role in this regard. An  economic imaginary is a semiotic order, i.e., a specific configuration of genres,  discourses and styles and, as such, constitutes the semiotic moment of a network of  social practices in a given social field, institutional order, or wider social formation  (Fairclough 2003). Thus an economic imaginary (re-)articulates various genres,  discourses, and styles around a particular conception of the economy and its extra-economic conditions of existence. Economic imaginaries are always selectively  defined – due to limited cognitive capacities and to the discursive and material biases  


 7  
of specific epistemes and economic paradigms. They typically exclude elements –  usually unintentionally – that are vital to the overall performance of the subset of  economic (and extra-economic) relations that have been identified. Such exclusions  limit in turn the efficacy of economic forecasting, management, planning, guidance,  governance, etc., because such practices do not (indeed, cannot) take account of  excluded elements and their impact. Moreover, if they are to prove more than  ‘arbitrary, rationalistic, and willed’ (Gramsci 1971: 376-7), these imaginaries must  have some significant, albeit necessarily partial, correspondence to real material  interdependencies in the actually existing economy and/or in the relations between  economic and extra-economic activities. Similar arguments would apply, with  appropriate changes, to so-called meso- or micro-level economic phenomena, such  as industrial districts or individual enterprises (see below).  .
Imagined economies are discursively constituted and materially reproduced on many  sites and scales, in different spatio-temporal contexts, and over various spatiotemporal horizons. They extend from one-off transactions through stable economic  organizations, networks, and clusters to ‘macro-economic’ regimes. While massive  scope for variation typically exists at an individual transactional level, the medium- to  long-term semiotic and material reproduction requirements of meso-complexes and  macro-economic regimes narrow this scope considerably. The recursive selection of  semiotic practices and extra-semiotic processes at these scales tends to reduce  inappropriate variation and to secure the ‘requisite variety’ (constrained heterogeneity  rather than simple uniformity) that supports the structural coherence of economic  activities. Indeed stable semiotic orders, discursive selectivities, social learning, path-dependencies, power relations, patterned complementarities, and material  selectivities all become more significant, the more that material interdependencies  and/or issues of spatial and intertemporal articulation increase in and across diverse  functional systems and the lifeworld. Yet this growing set of constraints also reveals  the fragility and, indeed, improbability of the smooth reproduction of complex social  orders. This highlights the importance of retaining an appropriate repertoire of  semiotic and material resources and practices that can be flexibly and reflexively  deployed in response to emerging disturbances and crises (cf. Grabher 1994).


 8  
Economic imaginaries at the meso- and macro-levels develop as economic, political,  and intellectual forces seek to (re)define specific subsets of economic activities as  subjects, sites, and stakes of competition and/or as objects of regulation and to  articulate strategies, projects and visions oriented to these imagined economies.  These forces tend to manipulate power and knowledge to secure recognition of the  boundaries, geometries, temporalities, typical economic agents, tendencies and  counter-tendencies, distinctive overall dynamic, and reproduction requirements of  different imagined economies (Daly 1991; Miller and Rose 1993). They also seek to  develop new structural and organizational forms that will help to institutionalize these  boundaries, geometries, and temporalities in an appropriate spatio-temporal fix that  can displace and/or defer capital’s inherent contradictions and crisis-tendencies.  However, by virtue of competing economic imaginaries, competing efforts to institute  them materially, and an inevitable incompleteness in the specification of their  respective economic and extra-economic preconditions, each 'imagined economy' is  only ever partially constituted. There are always interstitial, residual, marginal,  irrelevant, recalcitrant and plain contradictory elements that escape any attempt to  identify, govern, and stabilize a given 'economic arrangement' or broader 'economic  order' (Jessop 2002). These provide important sources of resistance and help  preserve a reservoir of semiotic and material resources that enable dominant  systems (through the agency of their associated social forces) to adapt to new  challenges through their re-articulation and recombination in the service of power.

TEACHER EDUCATION FOR CULTURAL DIVERSITY: ENHANCING THE CAPACITY OF 
TEACHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS TO ADDRESS DIVERSITY ISSUES 
Susan L. Melnick Kenneth M. Zeichner 
INTRODUCTION 
The matter of educating an increasingly diverse primary and secondary student 
population in public schools in the United States has assumed a position of critical 
importance. As educators and policy makers look forward to the 21st century, demographic 
projections suggest that, in the coming years, this goal will be complicated further by the fact 
that students will be increasingly different in background from one another and from their 
teachers, and many more students will be poor. The problem of preparing teachers to educate 
a diverse student body has been a major concern in the United States since the 1960s (Smith 
1969). Despite policy initiatives to recruit teacher candidates who are representative of the 
backgrounds and life experiences of diverse students, it is likely that most new teachers will 
continue to be Caucasian, monolingual speakers of English with backgrounds and life 
experiences vastly different from the students they will be expected to teach (Banks 1991).
Most teacher education programs acknowledge in principle the importance of 
pluralistic preparation of teachers. In practice, however, most teacher education 
programs actually represent what John Goodlad (1990) has called a monocultural 
approach (see also Grant 1993). In their failure to adequately prepare their graduates for 
diversity, such programs perpetuate traditional teaching practices which have largely failed to 
provide quality instruction for poor and ethnic and linguistic-minority students. Teacher 
candidates may come to teacher education with limited interracial and intercultural 
experience, erroneous assumptions about diverse youngsters, and limited expectations for the 
success of all learners (Zeichner 1993); it is the responsibility of teacher educators to 
adequately address these shortcomings.
 While this is not an easy task in itself, there is a related problem. Many teacher 
educators themselves are limited in cross-cultural experiences and understandings—they are 


overwhelmingly Caucasian and monolingual and culturally encapsulated (Ducharme and Agne 
1989). These circumstances make the task of educating teachers for diversity even more 
difficult to achieve in most settings because of widespread agreement about the importance of 
a culturally diverse learning community and institutional support for diversity, to enable 
teacher education programs to promote an appreciation for diversity and equity among 
prospective teachers (Hixson 1992). Although the vast inequities in U. S. society cannot 
be attributed to the failure of schools, the failure of schools to provide quality 
education for all students represents a crisis in education that is intolerable in a 
democratic society. The need for teacher education in the U. S. to adequately prepare 
teachers for diversity has never before been more critical than it is now, as the current review 
of NCATE's Professional Accreditation Standards clearly attests.
NCATE'S PROFESSIONAL ACCREDITATION STANDARDS: 
A TEMPLATE FOR ASSESSING THE CAPACITY OF 
INSTITUTIONS TO ADDRESS DIVERSITY ISSUES 
In response to the Constitutional provision for continuous review of the Professional 
Accreditation Standards (Article IX), the Standards Committee of the Unit Accreditation 
Board of NCATE undertook a review of the 1987 standards. This 1992 review resulted in 
several refinements to the existing standards, and the results were circulated for reactions and 
recommendations during the latter part of 1993. As described in the "Memorandum on the 
Draft of the Refinements" by NCATE President Arthur Wise (1993), the Standards 
Committee paid careful attention to two characteristics of the Standards and Indicators of 
Quality relevant to our concerns about preparing teachers to teach culturally diverse learners: 
the interweaving of "the place of conscience or moral  dimensions of teaching" (p. 2) into 
some of the standards and indicators and the "infusion of attention to multicultural and 
diversity issues across all standards" (p. 3).
43 ) 
52 6,
1. 52 
(1. 23 
) 50 
8, 1.
35 (1.
14 ) 
G irl 
s 52 
1, 1.
09 (1.
05 ) 
49 7,
Finally, model formulation in neural networks is shaped not only by theoretical, but also 
empirical considerations making the neural methodology a middle range approach between 
deductive and inductive model building.  This characteristic of neural networks should not be 
regarded as a negative aspect.  The increasing number of factors and reciprocal interactions 
which may characterize the causal structure of international conflicts make the development of 


7 fully specified theories more difficult.4  As result, some aspects of the causal interaction may 
remain undefined.  What is left unexplained by the theory can be “discovered” by the neural 
networks themselves since their flexible methodology enables them to learn from the empirical 
data.  Without de-emphasizing model building based on first principles, neural modeling can 
strengthen theory-building by supporting a constant interplay between theory and data.
The Neural Network Model  
Backpropagation multi-layer networks implement a non-linear mapping, or a function 
approximation, from a set of n input, x1, x2, …, xn, to a set of m outputs, y1, y2, ..., ym.  Although 
mapping is not new in quantitative studies, the way in which neural networks perform this input-

output transformation represents an important development for mathematical models of complex 
input-output relations.  In neural networks the complex relation between the inputs and outputs is 
modeled using a superposition of multiple non-linear functions, represented by neurons.  By 
increasing the number of functional transformations, the model can approximate any 
hypothetical relations between the selected explanatory and dependent variables.  The key point 
is that the number of non-linear functions, or neurons, need grow only as the complexity of the 
mapping itself grows (Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White 1990, Hornik and Stinchcombe 1992).
The major implication of using the flexible functional form provided by the superposition 
method is that the network functions become non-linear functions of the network adaptive 
parameters, the weights (wI).  Because of the complexity involved in the mathematical structure 
of the network, the procedure for determining the value of the parameters becomes a problem in 
non-linear optimization, which requires finding efficient learning algorithms to reuduce the 
network overall error function (Bishop 1996).  Our network model utilizes the backpropagation 
algorithm to calculate the weight values.  The backpropagation process is relatively simple in 


8 concept.  The objective is to compare the actual output calculated by the network with the target 
output, given in the training set, each time the network is presented with a sample case.  This 
comparison produces an error value in the output layer that is calculated as a function of the 
weights. Then the error is propagated backwards to the previous layer and used to adjust the 
weight values in each non-linear functions in order to reduce the difference between the actual 
output and the target output.5  Each time a new comparison is made, the error is further reduced.6  
Besides selecting the learning algorithm, another issue in neural network modeling is 
how to determine the optimum network architecture.  This mainly involves deciding the number 
and type of functional transformations needed.  Selecting the appropriate network architecture is 
an important part of model building.  A higher number of functions (neurons) will produce 
highly flexible networks, which may learn not only the data structure but also the underlying 
noise in the data.  Too few neurons will produce networks that are unable to model complex 
relationships.  In addition to deciding the number and type of activation function for the network,
other parameters need also to be selected.  Because of the number of parameters involved in the 
selection process, choosing the appropriate network architecture is a multi-criterion search 
problem.  To perform a global search through the space of possible combinations we adapt a 
genetic algorithm that uses a Darwinian model of evolution (Holland 1992, Davis 1991).  The 
genetic algorithm was used to calculate the number of hidden layers and hidden neurons, best 
activation functions, value of the learning rate,?, and momentum, α.7  The training patterns were entered in a shuffled order and the training was repeated ten times to avoid bias.8  The genetic 
algorithm found that the optimal configuration is a multi-layer neural network with one input 
layer, one hidden layer, and one output layer.  The input and hidden layer contains 8 processing 
units each and 2 in the output layer.  The hidden units utilize the tanh function, whereas the 


9 output units adopt the logistic function.9  Finally, the networks perform better using a learning 
rate and momentum equal to 0.7.  Figure 1 provides a schematic representation of the optimal 
configuration.  The Appendix presents the genetic algorithm optimization process and its results.
Astin, A. W. (1993). What matters in college:  Four critical years revisited. San Francisco, CA:  
Jossey-Bass.
Astin, A. W. (1999).  How the liberal arts college affects students. Daedulus, 128(1), 77-100.
Astone, B., & Nunez-Wormack, E. (1990). Pursuing diversity: Recruiting college minority  
students. Washington, D.C.: George Washington University.
Baird, L. L. (1976). Biographical and educational correlates of graduate and professional school  
admissions test scores. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 36(2), 415-420.
Berdie, R. F. (1971). Self-claimed and tested knowledge. Educational and Psychological  
Measurement, 31(3), 629-636.
Bowen, W. G., & Bok, D. (1998). The shape of the river: Long-term consequences of  
considering race in college and university admissions. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton  
University Press.


Self-Knowledge. Our research suggests a wide range of curricular and instructional 
strategies are used within these various dimensions. They attempt to socialize prospective 
teachers to see themselves as members of a culturally diverse society and to value cultures 
other than their own. Strategies include the use of autobiography, biography, and life history 
methods to help students understand their own cultural identities, and intellectually focused 
and socially supportive strategies of collaborative reflection such as "story telling" to help 
them reexamine their attitudes, assumptions, expectations, and beliefs about ethnic, racial,
and language groups different from their own (see Zeichner 1993).
Examples of this approach of helping teacher education students locate themselves 
within our culturally diverse society and examine their attitudes toward others include the 
work of King and Ladson-Billings (1990) at the University of Santa Clara, the work of 
Hollins (1990) at California State University—Hayward, the work of Gomez and Tabachnick 
(1991) at the University of Wisconsin—Madison, the work of Jim Banks at the University of 
Washington (1991), and the Teachers for Alaska program (Noordhoff and Kleinfeld 1993).
Much of the data from our literature reviews and case studies suggest that under 
some circumstances, these strategies have a positive and immediate impact on 
prospective teachers' attitudes and dispositions. However, there is some evidence in the 
literature to suggest that students often resist teacher educators' efforts to change their 
views (Ahlquist 1992). At times, teacher education practices designed to combat negative 
stereotypes actually reinforce teacher candidates' prejudices and misconceptions about 
diverse students (Haberman and Post 1992).
Cultural Knowledge. Another set of strategies is designed to provide students with 
cultural and historical knowledge to overcome what Ellwood (1990) has called their cultural 
ignorance of groups different from their own. We are studying Indiana University's American 
Indian Cultural Immersion Project which prepares students to student teach on the Navajo 
reservation in the southwestern U. S. Strategies used in this program include helping 
prospective teachers gain knowledge about both the common elements and the rich diversity 
within the history and culture of the Navajo people through literature, film, poetry, art work,
and discussions with Navajo people. During the cultural preparation that precedes the 
student-teaching semester, various people from the Navajo reservation are hired by the 
program and come to Indiana for brief periods of time to introduce prospective teachers to 


various and diverse aspects of contemporary Navajo life. During a recent orientation 
workshop, these cultural experts included a Navajo poet who read and discussed her work 
with the student teachers and a dormitory aide who taught the students basic Navajo words 
and discussed issues related to culturally appropriate and inappropriate behavior on the 
reservation. Cultural knowledge strategies are also used in our other two case study sites. At 
the University of Alaska—Fairbanks, the focus is on preparing students to work primarily 
with Alaskan Native students in rural villages and in urban multicultural schools. In the Urban 
Education Program of the Associated Colleges of the Midwest, the focus is on preparing 
students to work in urban schools serving the many different ethnocultural communities in the 
city of Chicago.

Cross-Country Comparisons 
Health Service Utilization in the Former Soviet Union: Evidence from Eight Countries Dina Balabanova, Martin McKee, Joceline Pomerleau, Richard Rose, and Christian Haerpfer 
Background. In the past decade, the countries that emerged from the Soviet Union have experiencedmajor changes in the inherited Sovietmodel of health care, which was centrally planned and provided universal, free access to basic care. The underlying principle of universality remains, but coexists with new funding and delivery systems and growing out-of-pocket payments. Objective. To examine patterns and determinants of health care utilization, the extent of payment for health care, and the settings in which care is obtained in Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine. Methods. Data were derived from cross-sectional surveys, representative of adults aged 18 and over in each country, conducted in 2001. Multistage random sample of 18,428 individuals, stratified by region and area, was obtained. Instrument contained extensive data on demographic, economic, and social characteristics, administered face-to-face. The analysis explored the health seeking behavior of users and nonusers (those reporting an episode of illness but not consulting). Results. In the preceding year, over half of all respondents visited a medical professional, ranging from 65.7 percent in Belarus to 24.4 percent in Georgia, mostly at local primary care facilities. Of those reporting an illness, 20.7 percent of all did not consult although they felt they should have done so, varying from 9.4 percent in Belarus to 42.4 percent in Armenia and 49 percent in Georgia. The main reason for not seeking care was lack of money to pay for treatment 
(45.2 percent), self-treatment with home-produced remedies (32.9 percent), and purchase of nonprescribed medicine (21.8 percent). There are marked differences between countries; unaffordability was a particularly common factor in Armenia, Georgia, and Moldova (78 percent, 70 percent, 54 percent), and much lower in Belarus and Russia. In Georgia and Armenia, 65 percent and 56 percent of those who had consulted paid 
out-of-pocket, in the form of money, gifts, or both; these figures were 8 percent and 19 percent in Belarus and Russia respectively and 31.2 percent overall. The probability of not consulting a health professional when seriously ill was sig-

nificantly higher among those over age 65, and with lower education. Use of health care was markedly lower among those with fewer household assets or a shortage of money, and those dissatisfied with their material resources, factors that explained some of the effects of age. A lack of social support (formal and informal) decreases further the probability of not consulting, adding to the consequences of poor financial status.
1927 


The probability of seeking care for common conditions varies widely among countries (persistent fever: 56 percent in Belarus; 16 percent in Armenia) and home remedies, alcohol, and direct purchase of pharmaceuticals are commonly used. Informal coping strategies, such as use of connections (36.7 percent) or offering money to health professionals (28.5 percent) are seen as acceptable. Conclusions. This article provides the first comparative assessment of inequalities in access to health care in multiple countries of the former Soviet Union, using rigorous methodology. The emergingmodel across the region is extremely diverse. Some countries (Belarus, Russia) have managed to maintain access for most people, while in others the situation is near collapse (Armenia, Georgia). Access ismost problematic in health systems characterized by high levels of payment for care and a breakdown of gate-keeping, although these are seen in countries facing major problems such as economic collapse and, in some, a legacy of civil war. There are substantial inequalities within each country and even where access remains adequate there are concerns about its sustainability.
Bremer, and Singer 1996).  Much of COW use of MIDs in the early years was predominantly 
descriptive and inductive in mapping characteristics of the international system, and with an 
implicit assumption that the important relationships would be more-or-less linear.  Recently,
however, other COW associates (Maoz and Abdolali 1989, Bremer 1992) have made major 
innovations in theoretically-driven use of MIDs at the dyadic level.  This chapter continues in 
that development, working further in what is now called the Kantian peace research program that 
extends the scope of dyadic influences from democracy to economic interdependence and 
international organizations.  In so doing it looks intently at the implications of using neural 
network analysis to relax the assumption that key relationships are fundamentally linear.


5 In the light of the dominance of statistical methods in conflict research, we need to 
consider the benefits that can result when neural network methodologies are applied to conflict 
data.  Statistically trained political scientists may ask: why neural networks?  Wouldn’t simpler 
and more established multivariate statistical techniques do better?  Answers to these questions 
can be articulated both from a methodological and theoretical level.
First, neural networks can provide a powerful method to develop non-linear and 
interactive models of militarized disputes, redressing the restrictive linear and fixed effect 
assumptions which have dominated the field.2  Recent development in the liberal peace literature 
seems to indicate that the causal processes at work in interstate conflicts result from complex 
interactions.  In recognition of these complex dynamics, Russett and Oneal (2001: 39) express 
doubt that individual causal relationships can be considered well in isolation.  Peace may result 
from multiple and overlapping liberal behaviors, shaped by democracy and interdependence,
which interact with the opportunities offered by the realist variables.  A synthesis of Kantian and 
realist effects emphasizes an interpretation of constraints on states’ willingness and ability to 
resort to violence.  Beck, King and Zeng (2000) similarly interpret the realist variables as 
creating a pre-scenario of low or high ex-ante probability of military conflict into which the 
influence of the liberal variables is plucked.  Or the effects of relative power on dispute 
outcomes—strong between non-democracies—may be much weaker when democracies settle 
their disputes (Gelpi and Griesdorf 2001).  Other studies assume that a reciprocal relationship, or 
feedback loop, runs between democracy and interdependence.  Democratic institutions may 
indirectly increase the weight of the economic constraints on militarized behavior by 
empowering economic interest groups in the state (Papayoanou 1997).  Another link may run as 
interdependence turn increases the number of international political constraints.  High levels of 


6 dyadic trade often create a need for new institutions to manage and stabilise the existing 
commercial relations.  These new institutions add more restraints on militarized behavior.3   
This interactive and non-linear perspective can be fully embraced by neural network 
models.  By superposing multiple non-linear functions and avoiding a priori constraints on the 
functional nature of the data examined, multi-layer networks can construct different causal 
structures in the same model and combine them together in a systematic way.  Indeed, a wide 
variability of the inputs’ effect is allowed, while avoiding the independence assumption of the 
random effect model (Beck, King, and Zeng 2000: 25).
Second, neural networks do not require independent observations, and thus deal better 
with the suspected influences that militarized events exercise on each other (Sarle 1994). As 
Beck, Katz, and Tucker (1998) argue, the conflict history of a state can, either positively or 
negatively, affect the state’s willingness to become involved in future conflict.  To overcome this 
problem, they suggest controlling for the number of years that have elapsed from the most recent 
occurrence of a conflict should be used.  However, that solution is problematic. While solving 
the independence problem, the year correction opens new issues.  It rests on the assumption that 
the effect of the other explanatory variables and time can be separated.  This seems very unlikely 
for some of the important variables in conflict analysis.  For instance, liberal theory expects 
interdependence to fall with the outbreak of a conflict, but to rise over time after a conflict ends.


 25  
Flemish anchorers unsurprisingly rejected the arguments of Daems and De Grauwe  and replied that it was not the relative share of foreign ownership that mattered but its  concentration in ‘strategic’ economic sectors (Oosterlynck 2004b). Strategic  importance was variously defined in terms of employment, technological and  innovative content, export volume, importance for social capital (e.g. media),  importance for underlying competitiveness and strategic needs of Flemish economy,  and being part of Flemish industrial heritage (Crols 1995; Oosterlynck 2004a;  Vlaamse Culturele Koepel and Vereniging Vlaamse Leerkrachten 1995). Thus  strategic importance is a vague idea that can be applied to large parts of the Flemish  economy. This is especially clear in the discursive use of the term in the Flemish  geo-economic strategy developed by Van den Brande. As minister-president of the  new Flemish government, he was looking for ways to link Flemish state formation to  Flemish nation formation (Blommaert 2000). With cultural and political autonomy  already largely acquired, like many Flemish nationalists, he felt that Flanders also  needed economic emancipation. His government’s anchoring strategy aimed to  transform Flanders from a nation of SMEs without home-grown multinationals into a  ‘real’ economic nation. The government believed that a Flemish majority or  controlling ownership was needed to anchor a company (Vlaamse Culturele Koepel  and Vereniging Vlaamse Leerkrachten 1995). This approach has been challenged by  an alternative strategy based, not on ownership, but on strategic decision-making  power. The Flemish economist, Daems, defines this as the ability to determine  company strategy (product developments, production technologies and export  markets) at local level (Daems 1998; Daems and Van de Weyer 1993). This would  be possible because, if companies were to apply corporate governance standards  (thereby ending traditional holding structures that enable small minorities to control  large blocks of shares), the separation between shareholders and managers would  give Flemish management enough autonomy to take strategic decisions.
The preceding paragraph illustrates the existence of two approaches to Flemish  anchoring, based on national ‘ownership’ and corporate governance respectively.  These concerns are rooted in different approaches to economic nationalism, i.e., to  the role of the national as an intermediate scale of interest between the individual  and humanity (Helleiner 2002). The nationalist ontology asks how a given nation can  attain power and prosperity, which implies that the people who comprise a nation  


 26  
somehow share a common economic fate and have an economic responsibility  towards their fellow citizens (Reich 1991). The ownership variant of anchoring  strategies is clearly informed by the traditional economic nationalist imaginary in  which, in Reich’s words, ‘the well-being of citizens was linked to the success of the  national economy, which depended in turn on the success of its giant corporations’  (1991: 34). The corporate governance variant is, for Reich again, more attuned to a  new conception of economic nationalism as transformed by globalization. What  matters for the nation’s future wealth is not a company’s nationality but the skills of  the local workforce and managers. Thus this variant stresses the importance of local  management experience. To ensure that they can manage without shareholder  interference, they need good working capital markets, institutional investors and  corporate governance. The nationality of the company is of minor importance in this  model, which is close to the Anglo-Saxon neo-liberal variety of capitalism.
The institutionalization of the Flemish space economy    
Since its 1830 inception, the Belgian state had to deal with a protracted language  conflict and uneven geographical development. The handling of these problems by  various social and political actors has produced two regions – Flanders and Wallonia  – and locked them into different socio-economic trajectories. This is reflected in the  rescaling of Belgium’s economic, political, and socio-cultural space. Steadily  increasing geo-political rescaling over 150 years of Belgian history, e.g., through  political and cultural struggles for regional autonomy and state restructuring, has  finally produced the decentralization of Belgian political space. The anchoring debate  likewise aims to transform Belgian economic space and is occurring just as geoeconomic rescaling is gathering pace through mechanisms such as European and  world market integration, the rise of multinational network firms, and the resurgence  of regional economies. This has created the space for pursuing anchoring strategies.
In addition to life satisfaction and television viewing time, the ESS includes a large number of socio-demographic characteristics. Control variables to be used are household income (adjusted for comparative price level at current US prices8), gender, age, marital status, employment status, education, working time, nationality and type of location.
The dependent variable life satisfaction is the response to the question: ‘‘All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole nowadays?’’ Answers are given on an 11-point scale ranging from 0 ‘‘extremely dissatisfied’’ to 10 ‘‘extremely satisfied’’ (Fig. 1). The average life satisfaction amounts to 7.0 (standard deviation 2.7). This average varies considerably between countries, and ranges from 5.6 in Hungary up to 8.4 in Denmark (Fig. 2). It is sometimes doubted that such life satisfaction data are comparable between nations, as the answers might partly reflect cultural differences. To control for such unobserved differences, country fixed effects are included in the regression analysis.
Television consumption is also captured by one single question: ‘‘On an average weekday, how much time do you spend watching television?’’ Answers are given in eight 
7 See O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b) for a discussion of the problem of welfare comparisons for people with time-inconsistent preferences. 8 Data on comparative price levels are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
288 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


0% 
5% 
10% 
15% 
20% 
25% 
30% 
0 extremely unsatisfied 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 extremely satisfied 
Fig. 1. Reported life satisfaction in 22 European countries 2002/2003. Data source: European Social Survey.
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Hungary Portugal 
Poland Greece 
Czech Republic France 
Israel Slovenia 
Germany Italy 
Spain United Kingdom 
Belgium Ireland Austria 
Netherlands Norway 
Luxembourg Sweden Finland 
Switzerland Denmark 
Fig. 2. Average reported life satisfaction in 22 European countries 2002/2003. Note: Average reported life satisfaction on a scale from 0 ‘‘extremely unsatisfied’’ to 10 ‘‘extremely satisfied’’. Data source: European Social Survey.
B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 289 


categories, ranging from ‘‘no time at all’’ to ‘‘more than 3 h’’. About 3% of respondents do not watch any television at all, while over 20% spend more than 3 h a day in front of their TV set (Fig. 3). This percentage varies considerably between countries. While only about 10% of respondents in Switzerland watch more than 3 h TV a day, more than 38% do so in Greece (Fig. 4).
Another extension of previous work is to further develop the methods of neural network 
analysis for international conflict.  Schrodt’s (1991) and Garson’s (1991) first efforts to use this 
technique in political science exposed two major drawbacks.  One is that neural networks are not 
efficient classifiers of rare events, because they are biased toward the modal value (the most 
common value in the output).  This can be a serious problem in large-N conflict analysis as 
militarized disputes are indeed rare events, with 90 percent of observations usually coded as 
zero.  In addition, it is hard to comprehend the causal model that the trained neural networks 
have internally constructed.  To address the issue of rare events’ prediction in neural models, we 
propose a sampling technique called balanced training with cross-validation strategy.  It makes 
use of the advantages of selecting on the dependent variable, while avoiding selection bias.
Our third goal is to offer three measures as guides to interpreting the relative influence of 
different variables on conflict.  To do so we use three measures.  The different information 
provided by each generates insights into the complex regularities discovered by the network.
Since our analysis uses variables from both realist and liberal theories, interpreting the network 
model also provides a test for hypotheses from the two theoretical perspectives.
The first two sections of this chapter consider why a neural network model is suitable for 
studying international conflict, and then discuss the model.  Next we focus on the analytical 
issues of rare event prediction in neural networks and use of the balanced training with cross-

validation strategy as a solution for the rare event bias in neural networks.  Section 4 briefly 
discusses the data utilized, and section 5 and 6 summarize the results.  Much of the discussion of 


4 the methodological innovations must be technical.  We nonetheless think these innovations are 
important, and that the results are substantively and theoretically interesting.
Why Neural Networks in Conflict Analysis?
The COW project has ranged over several levels of analysis.  J. David Singer (1961) 
initially endorsed the systemic level as most promising and expressed scepticism about the 
power of the nation-state level of analysis—a position shared, ironically, by a very different kind 
of scholar Waltz (1979).  Subsequently, Small and Singer (1976) declared their doubts about the 
emerging attention to a middle level of analysis between the systemic and state levels; that is, on 
pairs of states, or dyads.  Notably, in that article Singer questioned the democratic peace 
hypothesis, as Henderson remarks in this volume.  (Geller and Singer 1998: 85-96 suggests a 
certain subsequent mellowing on this point.)  Nevertheless, Singer was centrally involved in the 
origin and development of the Militarized International Dispute data set, which has proven one 
of the great achievements of the COW project.  His early influence is evident in conceptualizing 
(Leng and Singer 1977) MIDs as bilateral interactions, and a more recent report on use (Jones,
“Collective efficacy,” defined as cohesion among neighborhood residents combined with shared expectations for informal social control of public space, is proposed as a major social process inhibiting both crime and disorder. Disorder was measured by direct observation rather than through the subjective perceptions of neighborhood residents. The informal social control mechanism of collective efficacy (and the broken windows thesis as well) focuses on what is visible in public places.
Julie E. Samuels, Acting Director 
This publication summarizes the authors’ article, “Systematic Social Observation of Public Spaces: A New Look at Disorder in Urban Neighborhoods,” which appeared in American Journal of Sociology 105 (3) (November 1999): 603–51. © 1999 by the University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved. The summary is published with permission of the University of Chicago Press, publisher of the American Journal of Sociology.


Key findings: The study suggests that disorder does not directly promote crime, although the two phenomena are related, and that collective efficacy is a significant factor in explaining levels of crime and disorder.
? Disorder and crime alike were found to stem from certain neighborhood structural characteristics, notably concentrated poverty.
? Homicide, arguably one of the best measures of violence, was among the offenses for which there was no direct relationship with disorder. Disorder was directly linked only to the level of robbery.
? In neighborhoods where collective efficacy was strong, rates of violence were low, regardless of sociodemographic composition and the amount of disorder observed. Collective efficacy also appears to deter disorder: Where it was strong, observed levels of physical and social disorder were low, after controlling for sociodemographic characteristics and residents’ perceptions of how much crime and disorder there was in the neighborhood.
  
Keywords:   
Human-computer interaction, computer-mediated communication,
nonverbal communication, new media, communication technology, virtual  
reality 


    
1  
  
Introduction:   
The Experience of “Being with Another” in Networked Environments.
A great deal of networked communication can be described essentially as: a  
person using a medium to be with another. A set of pixels shaped like a smiling  
face, a voice crackling through a speaker, or a line of text emerging on a chat room  
screen create the sense of “being with another.” Research on physical presence  
explores this sense of “being in the virtual place,” focusing on ways in which the  
senses and our actions create a sense of space. But what of the sense “being  
together,” the most essential part of this mediated interaction between two  
people? How does the medium filter and affect our representation of the other  
during a mediated social interaction? Beyond the “sense of the place” that physical  
presence measures, there is the “sense of being with another,” or quite essentially,
the “sense of another through a medium.”    
To begin it might be useful prior to exploring definitions of social presence in  
greater detail, to provisionally define social presence succinctly as the “sense of  
being with another.” This other can be either a human or artificial intelligence.
Within human-computer interaction social presence theory studies how the “sense  
of being with another” is shaped and affected by interfaces. These others that we  
experience are primarily technologically mediated representations of other humans  
or forms of intelligence including mediated representations of remote humans via  
text, images, video, 3D avatars and in artificial representations of humanoid or  
animal-like intelligence including virtual human agents, computers, and robots.


    
2  
Techniques of designing representations of others to evoke social presence  
have a long history going back to the first stone sculpture to evoke a sense of  
some other being in the mind of an ancestral observer. Media representations and  
techniques have been progressively designed over time to activate these social  
responses (Reeves and Nass, 1996). Increasing the experience of social presence  
is repeatedly the design goal of various types of hardware and software engineering  
in areas such as high bandwidth teleconferencing systems (Lanier, 2001), speech  
interfaces (Yankelovich, Levow et al., 1995), social robots (Brooks 1999; Brooks,
Documentation of Breast Cancer and Deaths 
Breast cancer cases were defined as having occurred during the period from June 1988 through May 1998. Nurses who reported the occurrence of breast cancer were asked for permission to review their medical records, and breast cancer was confirmed through review of these records. When medical records were unavailable, breast cancer cases were defined as probable and included in the analysis if they were corroborated by an interview or a letter from the subject. Approximately two thirds of the deaths among cohort members were reported to us by next of kin or the postal system in response to follow-up questionnaires. In addition, we searched the National Death Index to identify deaths among the nonrespondents to each 2-year questionnaire; the computerized National Death Index is a highly sensitive method for identifying deaths in this cohort (34). Data on mortality were more than 98% complete (34,35). For all deaths possibly attributable to breast cancer, we requested permission from family members (subject to state regulation) to review the medical records. Breast cancer was considered to be the cause of death if the medical records or autopsy report confirmed a fatal breast cancer, if the breast cancer was listed as the underlying cause of death without another, more plausible cause, and if the nurse was known (from hospital records, a family member’s report, or another source) to have had breast cancer before death. In no case was the cause listed on the death certificate used as the sole criterion for death due to breast cancer. All interviews and reviews of medical records were conducted by investigators without knowledge of exposure. A total of 2441 case subjects with breast cancer were diagnosed in the base population from June 1988 through May 1998, and pathology records were obtained for 93% of the case subjects. Although these 2441 case subjects included 92 women whose pathology reports had not yet been obtained, we based 
our analyses on the total, because the accuracy of the self-reporting was extremely high (36). In addition, an analysis limited to case subjects confirmed by pathology reports yielded the same association with night work.
Study Population A total of 103 613 of the women returned the 
1988 questionnaire, which included the question about night work. The population for this study consisted of 85 197 (82.2%) of the respondents who answered the question on night work. Women who did not answer the shiftwork question on the 1988 questionnaire did not differ substantially from respondents in terms of their risk profile (1). We excluded women who reported breast cancer or any other cancer other than nonmelanoma skin cancer on the 1988 questionnaire or any previous questionnaire. A total of 78 562 women remained to form the baseline population for this analysis, and 736 015 person-years of follow-up were accrued from June 1988 through May 1998.
Statistical Analysis Women were first categorized according to their 
night work status; the groupings were selected to provide equal 15-year categories: having worked rotating night shifts either never or 1–14, 15–30, or 29 or more years. In some analyses, we collapsed the data into only two categories; in others, we went back to the original eight categories. Information about breast cancer and established risk factors for breast cancer was updated according to the biennial follow-up questionnaire. Information on alcohol consumption was updated every 4 years—1986, 1990, and 1994. For each participant, person-months were allocated to categories of years having worked on rotating night shifts, according to the 1988 data. The primary analysis was based on incidence rates, with person-months of follow-up used as the denominator. We used relative risk (RR) as the measure of association; the RR was defined as the incidence rate of breast cancer among women in various categories of years working on rotating night shifts divided by the incidence rate among women who never worked on rotating shifts. Mantel–Haenszel summary RRs were calculated, adjusting for age in 5-year categories (37). All statistical tests were two-sided. Tests of trends across categories of exposure were calculated by treating the levels of exposure as a continuous, ordinal variable in the regression model. Pooled logistic regression models were used to calculate RRs with adjustment for age, age at menarche (?12, 13, and ?14 years), age at menopause (?43, 44–46, 47–49, 50–52, 53–55, 56–58, and >58 years), parity (nulliparous, 1–2, 3–4, and ?5), age at first birth (<25, 25–29, and ?30 years), weight change between age 18 years and menopause (<2, 2–9, 10–20, and ?20 kg) for menopausal women only, body mass index (weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters) at age 18 years in five categories (<21, 21–22.9, 23–24.9, 25–28.9, and?29 kg/m2), current alcohol consumption (nondrinkers <90 and ?90 g/week), height in eight categories (?150, 151–155, 156–160, 161– 165, 166–170, 171–175, 176–180, and >180 cm), oral contraceptive use (ever/never), use of postmenopausal hormones (never, past user <5 years, past user ?5 years, current user <5 years, and current user ?5 years), menopausal status, benign 
breast disease (yes/no), and family history of breast cancer (yes/no). For all factors, indicator variables were created for missing values and included in the analyses. With short intervals between questionnaires and the low rate of events, this approach yields results similar to those of a Cox regression analysis with time-varying covariates (38).
Many programs and states like California now require all teacher education students to 
experience a variety of culturally different schools prior to certification (e.g., Ross, Johnson,
and Smith 1991). Other efforts combine both the school and community immersion 
experience and require student teachers to spend some time in communities during their 
practicums and student teaching. But merely requiring the school experience, the community 
experience, or both, does not necessarily insure that students will develop the cultural 
sensitivity and intercultural competence needed for teaching diverse learners. Our work and 
that of others has shown that careful preparation for the field experiences, as in the year-long 


cultural training in the American Indian project, careful monitoring of the experience while 
students are in the field and opportunities to reflect about and analyze the experiences are 
important. It has also been argued that it is important for those who supervise these 
experiences to have had successful teaching experience in the kinds of communities in which 
student teachers are working (see Zeichner and Hoeft, in press).
Teacher Education for Diversity and Teacher Learning 
In general, the empirical evidence regarding the success of these various 
strategies in helping to prepare prospective teachers to teach diverse students is very 
weak. At best, some teacher educators such as Etta Hollins (1990), Joyce King and Gloria 
Ladson-Billings (1990), and Lanny Beyer (1991) have been able to demonstrate some 
immediate influence of one or more of these strategies through the presentation of student 
teacher self-reports. These studies clearly show that under certain conditions, teacher 
education programs are able to help prospective teachers reexamine both themselves and 
their attitudes toward others and to gain knowledge about various cultural groups in the 
United States that had been excluded from their own education. For the most part, however,
the literature is filled with assertions about the value of particular practices which are not 
substantiated by empirical evidence (Grant and Secada 1990). In no case have we been able 
to find in the literature convincing evidence related to the long-term impact of these strategies 
on teachers and their teaching practices. Our case study design includes interviews with 
graduates of each of the programs we are studying. Through these interviews, we hope to be 
able to provide some insights into the question of the long-term impact of particular 
strategies to educate teachers for diversity.
Ultimately, we need to better understand how to prepare teachers for diversity in 
ways that are connected to active and successful efforts by teachers to promote greater equity 
and social justice in schools.  Changing the oftentimes negative attitudes and low 
expectations that teachers often hold for ethnic and language minority students and 
overcoming teachers’ cultural ignornance are only first steps in dealing with the serious 
problems of inequity that we face in American public education.


The Problem of the Institutional Environment 
The foregoing examples of selection and socialization strategies show some promise 
despite limited empirical evidence of long-term impact on teachers and their practices. The 
fundamental problem is that, in using these potentially effective strategies, teacher educators 
often define the task of teacher education for diversity only as one of socialization and have 
ignored the selection and institutional aspects of the problem. The institutional environment 
in which a teacher education program is embedded is critical in determining the success of 
curriculum and instructional strategies.
Opportunity costs of time cannot be measured directly in our data. Therefore we use different indicators to distinguish between individuals with high and low opportunity costs of time: 
(i) Peoplewho can freely transfer timebetweenwork and leisure tend to have higher (monetary) opportunity costs of time compared to people with fixed working hours. Hence, respondents are assigned to the two groups according to the flexibility of their working hours. Answers to the question ‘‘[P]lease say howmuch the management at your work allows you to be flexible in yourworking hours?’’ are given on an 11-point scale ranging from 0 ‘‘I have no influence’’ to 10 ‘‘I have complete control’’. Respondents who indicate a value between 0 and 5 constitute the group with low opportunity costs of time, while those who give an answer between 6 and 10 form the other group. Only individuals who are employed (at least part time) are included in these sub-samples.
(ii) As a second indicator, employment status and profession are used. Retirees and the unemployed tend to have lots of free time and therefore form the group with low opportunity costs of time. On the other hand, working people, especially those who are self-employed and those in high positions and professions (legislators, senior officials, managers and professionals according to ISCO-88 classification) are assigned to the group with high opportunity costs of time.
Table 2 reports summary statistics for the different groups, as well as for the whole population. The groups divided according to flexibility of working hours do not differ much in most socio-demographic characteristics. The group with high opportunity costs of time watches a bit less TV (e.g. 20% of respondents watch more than 2.5 h TV a day compared 
296 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


Table 2 Summary statistics 
Mean values Whole population 
Flexibility of working hours as distinction criteria Employment status/profession as distinction criteria 
Group with high opportunity costs of time 
Group with low opportunity costs of time 
Group with high opportunity costs of time 
Group with low opportunity costs of time 
Life satisfaction 7.03 7.51 6.94 7.28 6.73 No TV at all 3.25% 3.00% 2.79% 3.73% 2.72% Less than 0.5 h TV 5.61% 6.86% 6.20% 8.66% 2.82% 0.5–1.5 h TV 29.21% 38.59% 32.98% 40.71% 18.35% More than 1.5–2.5 h TV 29.34% 31.47% 32.44% 27.90% 26.95% More than 2.5 h TV 32.59% 20.08% 25.59% 19.01% 49.15% Working hours 18.87 39.20 38.35 41.03 0 Household income 
(EUR, PPP) 1956.56 2919.68 2065.86 2879.43 1313.70 
Age 46.18 40.96 39.44 43.50 64.32 Not completed primary 
education 3.91% 0.43% 1.19% 1.09% 8.76% 
Primary or first stage of basic education 
13.27% 4.66% 8.09% 7.08% 22.44% 
Lower secondary or second stage of basic education 
22.68% 15.96% 22.34% 12.50% 24.86% 
Upper secondary education 32.48% 35.45% 37.75% 24.29% 27.03% Post-secondary, non-tertiary 
education 8.30% 10.88% 10.24% 9.53% 5.14% 
First stage of tertiary education 
12.92% 21.30% 13.21% 28.92% 8.08% 
Second stage of tertiary education 
5.72% 11.01% 6.68% 16.22% 3.26% 
Observations 42,021 6460 7062 5950 8974 
Data source: European Social Survey, World Development Indicators.
B .S 
. F 
rey et 
al. / 
Journal of 
E conom 
ic P 
sychology 28 
(2007) 283–313 
297 


to 26% in the other group) and has a somewhat higher income, as well as a higher level of education. People in this group report, on average, half a point higher life satisfaction (7.51 compared to 6.94) than people in the other group. The groups divided according to employment status and profession differ more with regard to their socio-demographic characteristics. The group with high opportunity costs of time includes more young people and more males, who watch considerably less TV (e.g. only 19% of respondents watch more than 2.5 h TV a day compared to 49% in the other group) and have a much better education (see also Table A1).
Table 3 reports the results of linear regression estimates for the different groups according to the different criteria. In order not to overload the table, the regression coefficients for the control variables are not explicitly shown (they are presented in Table A2).
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women in the United States. To date, the relationship between night work and breast cancer risk has not been evaluated in prospective cohort studies. A causal link between the two would be of public health importance, because small changes in shift patterns may create a substantial decrease of disease burden among women.
In this report, we evaluate the relationship between night work, as a surrogate for light exposure at night, and breast cancer risk in a large prospective cohort of premenopausal and postmenopausal women. Our analysis is based on 10 years of follow-up in 78 562 women participating in the Nurses’ Health Study.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS 
In 1976, a total of 121 701 female registered nurses 30–55 years of age and living in 11 large U.S. states were enrolled in the Nurses’ Health Study. Since baseline, they have completed biennial-mailed questionnaires that comprise items about their health status, medical history, and known or suspected risk 
Affiliations of authors: E. S. Schernhammer, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; F. Laden, F. E. Speizer, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and Department for Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston; W. C. Willett, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health; D. J. Hunter, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, and Harvard Center for Cancer Prevention, Boston; I. Kawachi, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and Department of Health and Social Behavior, Harvard School of Public Health; G. A. Colditz, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, and Epidemiology Program, Dana-Faber/ Harvard Cancer Center, Boston. Correspondence to: Eva S. Schernhammer, M.D.,
M.P.H., Channing Laboratory, 181 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115 (e-mail: eva.schernhammer@ channing.harvard.edu). Reprint requests to: Graham A. Colditz, M.D.,
D.P.H., Nurses’ Health Study, Channing Laboratory, 181 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115. See “Notes” following “References.” 
© Oxford University Press 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 93, No. 20, October 17, 2001 REPORTS 1563 
 by guest on M ay 7, 2013 
http://jnci.oxfordjournals.org/ D 
ow nloaded from 
  



factors for cancer (31) and heart disease (32). The questions include age, age at menarche, parity, age at first birth, weight, height, menopausal status, family history of breast cancer, and personal history of benign breast disease and cancer. Every 2 years, follow-up questionnaires have been sent to cohort members to update the information on potential risk factors and to identify newly diagnosed case subjects with cancer and other major medical events. In 1980, the questionnaire was expanded to include an assessment of diet (31,33) and alcohol consumption. Follow-up data are available for more than 90% of the cohort. Further details of the Nurses’ Health Study are described elsewhere (34).
Ascertainment of Night Shift Working Status 
In 1988, the study participants were asked how many years in total they had worked rotating night shifts with at least three nights per month in addition to days or evenings in that month. Information on lifetime years worked on rotating night shift was gathered in eight prespecified categories: never, 1–2, 3–5, 6–9, 10–14, 15–19, 20–29, and 30 or more years. Of the 103 613 nurses who responded to the 1988 questionnaire, 85 197 answered the shiftwork question.
A second approach is the creation of a consortium where a group of institutions 
combine their resources to hire staff with expertise in teacher education for diversity to 
provide part of the teacher education program, usually field experiences and a few courses 
and seminars related to teaching for cultural diversity. One of our case study sites, the Urban 
Education Program in Chicago, employs four faculty not directly associated with any of the 
member colleges whose expertise is in teacher education for diversity. This program, which 
has existed since the fall of 1963, has provided courses in multicultural education and in 
instruction for limited English proficient students and school and community experiences to 
hundreds of prospective teachers from small liberal arts colleges which were unable by 
themselves to offer these experiences.
Our research discovered two other consortia focusing on teacher education for 
diversity, the Cooperative Urban Teacher Education Program (CUTE) which currently 
involves approximately 20 colleges and universities in 6 states. This program began in 1967 
and is based on an earlier program at Central Missouri State College. CUTE has graduated 
over 2,000 teachers and, during the 1970s, was adopted by other institutions across the 
country (McCormick 1990).
Another cooperative arrangement, involving eight colleges, is the Urban Education 
Semester of the Venture Consortium coordinated by Bank Street College in New York City.
This urban educational experience for college juniors, who have not necessarily made a 
commitment to a career in teaching, involves interdisciplinary course work at Bank Street and 
field experiences in East Harlem schools (Levine and Pignatelli 1994).


All three of these consortia provide preparation for teaching in urban schools to 
students from colleges without the faculty or schools to implement their own intensive cross-

cultural teacher education program.
A third approach to the institutional aspects of the problem of teacher education for 
diversity involves the provision of systematic staff development for teacher education 
faculty. This approach helps faculty learn about various aspects of teacher education for 
diversity and how to incorporate it into their institutions and programs. For example, The 
Multicultural Education Infusion Center at San Diego State University in California with 
funding from the U.S. Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Affairs, provided a two-

week intensive institute in June 1993 to teams of faculty from 15 teacher education 
institutions. A follow-up network experience  was designed to increase the capability of these 
institutions to prepare teachers for work with diverse students (Pang 1993).
In an effort to specifically move away from judgments of the medium,
Nowak (2000) and Choi (Choi, Miracle, Biocca, 2001) used a measure of perceived  
similarity, labeled homophilly (McCroskey, Richmond et al., 1975) to measure the  
user’s perception of avatars and agents in virtual environments. This measure  
attempts to capture the sense of feeling similar in attitudes, behaviors, or emotions  
to the other.


    
23  
Behavioral Indicators  
Behavioral measures are common in studies of face-to-face interactions  
(e.g., Coker and Burgoon, 1987). These are used as measures of interrelated  
variables such as involvement and immediacy. Some of the verbal or non-verbal  
indicators such as voice inflection or facial expression may be indicative of social  
presence.
The assumption behind the use of behavioral indicators is straightforward: If  
the user is engaged in X and/or Y social behavior, then they must feel that the  
other is socially present. The presence or absence of the behavioral indicator may  
be explicitly taken as a measure of social presence.
We can find few examples of the use of behavioral measures explicitly as a  
measure of social presence. Heeter (1992) measured the percentage of  
participants who preferred games against the computer only, with or against  
another person, and what type of experiences respondents would prefer other  
social entities. Heeter’s study of choice behavior was explicitly interested in media  
selection as an indicator of social presence.
Psychophysiological Measures  
Although psychophysiological indicators such as heart rate, skin conductance,
6. Today only 2% of all journeys in the UK are by bike whereas in a bike-friendly country such as Denmark the same figure is 20 % (Independent 06/02/05).
7. http://www.statistics.gov.uk/StatBase/ ssdataset.asp?vlnk=7202&Pos=4&Pos=4&C olRanl=2&Ra [accessed 9 September 2005].
8. The project, ‘Global Citizenship and the Environment’ ran from November 1996 to April 1999, and was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC – award number R000236768). For more information, see Szerszynski, Urry and Myers (2000).
9. For an extended discussion of the issues explored in this section, see Szerszynski (2005: ch. 10).
10. See cover image of Szerszynski (2005).
11. See http://nctn.hq.nasa.gov/innovation/ Innovation_84/wnewview.html [accessed 9 September 2005] for a fuller NASA account of the reception of the image.
Analyses 
Trajectory Model Estimation 
Main Model. We first estimated trajectory group models in order to identify groups of children with distinct developmental patterns. Toward this end, a semi-parametric group-based approach (Jones, Nagin, & Roeder, 2001; Nagin, 1999, 2005) was used to examine the development of PA over time. Specifically, a general nonlinear Mixtures of Curves program (MOC) (Boulerice, 2001) served to identify subgroups of children with distinct developmental trajectories of physical aggression across the four assessments. The trajectory methodology uses all available developmental data points and assigns individuals to categories on the basis of a posterior probability rule. Resulting groups are meant to represent approximations of an underlying continuous process (Nagin, 2005; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999, 2001).
First, in order to identify the model with the preferred number of groups, models with a varying number of trajectories were estimated. Second, for each group in the preferred model, parameters for constant (i.e., intercept), linear, quadratic and cubic terms were estimated. We modeled the data according to a zero-inflated Poisson distribution.
Selection of the best fitting model was determined using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), as well as other fit indices such as the examination of the entropy and comparison of fitted versus observed values. The BIC was calculated as: BIC = −2 log(L) + log(n) × k, where L is the model’s maximized likelihood, n is the sample size, and k is the number of parameters in the model. The entropy is an index indicating the extent to which the groups are well separated. It also reflects the extent to which subjects can be classified with confidence in a given trajectory group. For instance, if two trajectory groups have similar intercept and slope, the entropy will be poor (groups are not well separated) and the probabilities that a subject is classified in one of the two groups will be low (poor prediction of group membership). The model which minimized the BIC (Schwarz, 1978) and maximized the entropy was chosen.


Trajectories of Physical Aggression 77 
The statistical procedure yields, for every subject, the probability of being classified in each of the trajectory groups. The “posterior probabilities of group membership” were central to the analysis. For each individual in the sample, the posterior probabilities estimate the probability of the child belonging to each trajectory group. For example, consider a child whose mother persistently rated him as highly physically aggressive. For this individual the posterior probability estimate of the child belonging to a low trajectory group would be near zero, whereas the probability estimate of the child belonging to a high aggression group would be large. Each child was assigned to the group for which he or she had the largest posterior probability estimate. This is the group that best conforms to the child’s observed behavior. Ideally, the posterior probability should be near 1 for this trajectory group. In the present analysis, the average posterior probability for the assigned group ranged between 0.77 and 0.79, thereby indicating good fit of the model (Nagin, 1999, 2005).
In subsequent analyses involving prediction of the high trajectory group membership, the posterior probabilities are used for weighting of the data and therefore allow for correction of the assignment rule.
Tests of Cohort Effects. We tested for the presence of cohort effects that could threaten the validity of estimating trajectories with children of different ages at cycle 1. Thus, the analysis aimed at testing whether there was an effect of age on the trajectories. Specifically, a multinomial logit model was estimated with the trajectories of PA as the outcome and age at cycle 1 as the independent variable. Recall that the age of the participants varied between 0 and 9 years at cycle 1, each age group of one year representing one cohort. Therefore, the cohort variable was dummy coded (varying between 0 and 9) and entered in the regression. The reference group was the last cohort. The overall chi-square for the cohort variable was 15.92 and was not statistically significant (p = 0.07), rejecting the hypothesis that age at cycle 1 had an effect on the trajectories.
Future research should also endeavor to distinguish between the direct effects of a 
terrorist incident and the indirect consequences. The latter include the costs imposed on 
the population of the targeted country by the political reactions. As discussed, numerous 
estimates reported do not only reflect the direct consequences of terrorism but also the 
impact of the subsequent counter measures. In the case of foreign trade and the aviation 
industry, for example, enhanced security measures are likely to account to a large extent 
for the reduction in bilateral trade and the drop in demand respectively. The political 
reactions may reflect voters’ demands for increased security or a strategic exploitation by 
politicians of the “rally round the flag” effect and may range from increased expenditures 
for military and secret services to restrictions in human rights. Such more extended 
studies would not only require data on the number and severity of terrorist attacks, but 


- 26 -

would also need to analyze the determinants of the political actions imposing these 
indirect costs on the population.
References 
Abadie, Alberto and Javier Gardeazabal (2003). The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the 
Basque Country. American Economic Review 93(1): 113-132.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001). The Colonial Origins of Comparative 
Development: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review 91(5): 1369-1401.
Alesina, Alberto, Sule Ozler, Nouriel Roubini and Phillip Swagel (1996). Political Instability and Economic Growth. Journal of Economic Growth 1(2): 189-211.
Aziz, Heba (1995). Understanding Attacks on Tourists in Egypt. Tourism Management 16(2): 91-95.
Barro, Robert J. (1991). Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2): 407-443.
4, 6, and 8 years, while data from cohort 4 served to estimate the trajectory points at ages 3, 5, 7, and 9 years. Thus, the children contributing a data point at age 2 were from a different cohort than those contributing for age 3, although only one year separated their birth. We tested for the possibility of cohort effects (see analyses section).
Instruments and Procedures 
Trained interviewers visited the participants in their homes. We used data from a face-to-face interview with the Person Most Knowledgeable about the child (PMK), which was the biological or adoptive mother in 91.4% of interviews. In the remaining cases, the PMK was the biological father (6.6%), another family member (e.g., grand-mother: 1.3%), or a step-parent (0.6%). Informed consent was obtained from all PMKs.
Assessment of PA During Childhood 
The frequency of PA was assessed between the ages of 2 and 11 years in the NLSCY sample. The PMK rated the frequency at which the child was physically aggressive along a three-point scale ranging from “Never” (0) to “Sometimes” (1) to “Often” (2). The physical aggression items were: “kicks, bites, hits other children”; “gets into many fights”; and “reacts with anger and fighting.” The items were summed into a physical aggression scale that had a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 6. A score of 2 on the scale reflects the fact that children “sometimes” or occasionally exhibit some of the physically aggressive behaviors or alternatively, frequently use one physically aggressive behavior. The reliability coefficients for the scale ranged between 0.60 and 0.76 and tended to be higher among older children. These coefficients are comparable to those obtained in previous studies in Canada, New Zealand, and the United States which used a similar PA scale among school age children (Broidy et al., 2003). The scale was shown to have good predictive value for adolescent violent behaviors (Broidy et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999).
Predictors of the High PA Trajectory 
Family Characteristics 
We selected cycle 1 family and child variables that were conceptually or empirically related to the development of aggressive behaviors (e.g., Jaffee, Caspi,


76 Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc, Nagin, and Tremblay 
Moffitt, Belsky, & Silva, 2001; Nagin & Tremblay, 2001; Tremblay, 2000; Tremblay et al., 2004). The predictors were dichotomized and coded to represent risk. First, early childbearing was coded according to whether the mother was 21 years or less at the birth of the first child (1) or more than 21 years (0). Being younger than 21 years old at the time of the birth of the first child was shown to be a valid indicator of risk in several Canadian studies (e.g., Tremblay et al., 2004; Nagin & Tremblay, 2001). Third, low maternal education was coded according to whether the mother had a high-school diploma (0) or not (1). Fourth, single-parent family was coded according to whether both parents were living with the child (0) or not (1). Fifth, low household income was coded according to whether the family income was at or below the 25th percentile of the income distribution (1) or above the 25th percentile (0). Not having graduated from high school, single parent families, and low income have been commonly used as indicators of risk and have been shown to predict children’s maladjustment (e.g., NICHD ECCRN, 2004, Tremblay et al., 2004; Nagin & Tremblay, 2001). We selected predictors that were related to the mother or to the family and not to the father specifically because of missing values on variables concerning the father.
Family Processes Variables 
Three parenting scales were used to predict membership in the trajectory groups: Positive parenting, hostile/inefficient parenting, and consistent parenting. Mothers rated the frequency of specific parenting behaviors on a scales ranging from “never” to “many times each day.” The positive parenting scale included four items reflecting the frequency with which the parent plays, laughs, or does enjoyable things with his/her child. Scores ranged between 0 and 20. High scores indicated more positive interactions. The Cronbach α was 0.81. The hos-tile/ineffective scale included seven items reflecting the frequency with which the parent becomes annoyed with the child, praises the child (scored negatively); disapproves of the child’s behavior; gets angry and punishes the child; or feels ineffective at managing the child. Scores ranged between 0 and 25. High scores indicated more hostile/ineffective interactions. The Cronbach α was 0.71. The consistent parenting scale includes five items reflecting the frequency at which the parent makes sure that the child does what he/she was asked to do, or the frequency with which the child gets away with things for which he/she should have been punished. Scores ranged between 0 and 20. A high score indicates consistent parenting. The Cronbach α was 0.66. Finally, we used a scale composed of 12 items measuring the quality of family functioning 
(communication, problem resolution, control of disruptive behavior, showing and receiving affection; Boyle et al., 1987). The scores ranged from 0 to 36 on the scale. The Cronbach α was 0.88. Thus, the predictors, taken from the home interview conducted at cycle 1 were household income; mother’s age at birth of first child; mother’s level of education; family composition, parenting practices and family functioning.
It is a demanding cognitive task, and superficial or socially desirable responses, without 
adequate consideration of the budget constraint or substitutes, can result. To correctly 
state one’s own current level of life satisfaction, in contrast, is much less demanding and 
strategic responses are unlikely. Similarly, the stringent conditions of the approaches 
based on revealed preferences, like housing or labor market equilibrium in the case of the 
hedonic market approach, do not have to be met in order to evaluate welfare effects 
through the use of life satisfaction data.17 
Frey et al. (2004) use the life satisfaction approach to assess the costs of terrorism in 
France, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. By way of illustration, an 
analysis of the Northern Ireland conflict is presented here.
Life satisfaction data are taken from the Euro-Barometer Survey Series (1970-1999); the 
variable is the categorical response to the following question: “On the whole, are you 
very satisfied [4], fairly satisfied [3], not very satisfied [2], or not at all satisfied [1] with 
the life you lead?” As an indicator for the salience and intensity of terrorist activity, the 
number of deaths resulting from the conflict in Northern Ireland is taken, as compiled by 
Sutton (1994; an updated index is provided by the Conflict Archive on the Internet 
(www.cain.ulst.ac.uk)). This indicator is not restricted to terrorism in particular, but 
includes political violence in general. In order to identify the effect of terrorism on 
individuals’ life satisfaction, the authors use a combined time-series (for the period 1975 
to 1998) and cross-section analysis (with Northern Ireland, the rest of the United 
Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland). Specifically, a micro-econometric happiness 
function is specified, whereby the life satisfaction of an individual living in a particular 
region at a particular time is explained by differences in the level of terrorism across the 
three regions and over time, the individual’s household income, other personal and socio-

demographic characteristics, as well as region and time fixed effects.
                                                   17 However, there are the conditions of cardinality and interpersonal comparability of the individual statements of well-being. Although economists are likely to be skeptical about both claims, there is a lot of evidence that both of them may be less of a problem on a practical level than on a theoretical level (see e.g. Kahneman 1999; Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Frijters 2004). Furthermore, the life satisfaction approach has several problems in common with the revealed preference methods: (i) It is not immune to spurious correlations that are the result of omitted variables, (ii) perceived risks must be correlated with objective risk measures and (iii) pure public goods and, therefore, the existence value cannot be captured.


- 24 -

The estimation results suggest that the number of terrorist fatalities has a statistically 
significant negative effect on reported life satisfaction. For an increase of one standard 
deviation in the number of recorded fatalities, i.e. an increase of 53.7 fatalities, life 
satisfaction is lowered by 0.041 on the four-point scale. This effect is about a tenth of the 
effect of being unemployed rather than employed. Thus, the indicator for terrorism is 
correlated with people’s subjective well-being in a sizeable way.
The estimated coefficients for terrorism and individual income can be used to calculate 
the hypothetical willingness-to-pay for a discrete change in the level of terrorism. Frey et 
al. (2004) calculate a hypothetical willingness-to-pay of a resident of Northern Ireland for 
a reduction in the number of fatalities to the average level of Great Britain and the 
Republic of Ireland. Accordingly, a resident of Northern Ireland (with average household 
income) would be willing to pay around 41% of his income for a reduction in terrorist 
activity to the level that prevails in the more peaceful parts of the country or the sister 
republic. This estimate is surprisingly high. However, it might to some extent reflect the 
ferocity of the conflict. After all, Northern Ireland was on the brink of all-out civil war; 
Fay et al. (1999, p. 204), for example, estimate that around two thirds of the Northern 
Irish population live in households where someone has been injured in a conflict related 
incident.
The third form of diversity, diversity interactions, is represented by students’ exchanges  
with racially and ethnically diverse people as well as exposure to diverse ideas, information, and  
experiences. Social psychologists claim that the more interaction one has with others who hold  
different views, or the more one learns about various aspects of human diversity, the more likely  
it is that one will be challenged to think and respond in novel ways.  For example, people who  
interact with more complex social structures exhibit a heightened sense of individuality while  
simultaneously showing a more complex attentiveness to the social world (Coser, 1975). Gurin  
(1999) contends that racially and ethnically diverse learning environments provide the types of  
complex social structures that stimulate the development of active thinking processes.
These three forms of diversity are not mutually exclusive. In fact, students often learn the  
most about diversity in its many forms not from classes or workshops, but through interacting  
with others whose views and cultures differ from their own.  Moreover, while diversity-related  
initiatives benefit students who are exposed to them—even on campuses that are racially and  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 6  
ethnically homogeneous—their impact on students can be more powerful on campuses that have  
greater structural diversity (Chang, 2002). In sum, while each form of diversity can confer  
significant positive effects on educational outcomes, the impact of each is multiplied by the  
presence of the other types of diversity (Chang, 1999, 2000, 2002; Gurin, 1999; Hurtado, Milem,
Clayton-Pedersen, Allen, 1998, 1999). Conversely, the impact of each form of diversity is  
diminished in settings where the other forms are less prevalent (Milem & Hakuta, 2000).
What Other Institutional Conditions Foster Experiences With Diversity?
The evidence of the impact of diversity on student learning and development is very  
promising. At the same time, we know relatively little about the factors and institutional  
conditions that promote and enhance students’ experiences with diversity. Virtually all types of  
colleges and universities assert the value and promise of exposing students during college to all  
forms of human diversity (Alger, 1997). But do the benefits of diversity extend equally to  
students in all types of institutions?
Hu and Kuh (2003) found that students in private institutions more frequently interacted  
with students from different backgrounds and that students at large doctoral-extensive  
universities and liberal arts colleges had more experiences with diversity than their counterparts  
at other types of institutions. It is not surprising that students at large universities would have  
more exposure to diversity, given that these institutions typically enroll more students from  
different racial, ethnic and cultural groups. Somewhat unexpected is that students at smaller  
liberal arts colleges would report equally frequent experiences with diversity. Historically, small  
liberal arts colleges have claimed to have distinctive missions, especially when compared with  
large public universities (Clark, 1970; Kuh, Schuh, Whitt, & Associates, 1991; Townsend,
  
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
  
The primary purpose of the research was to investigate the sources of students’  
explanations and understanding of natural phenomena in terms of the students’ cultural  
and school science experiences.  Village elders were interviewed to ascertain their  
explanations which were interpreted in terms of spirits, spells and magic; personal  
experience, religion and modern science.  These explanations as well as scientific  


 7  
  
explanations were used to develop two questionnaires to be administered to secondary  
school students to ascertain their choice of explanations of the same natural phenomena.
  
BACKGROUND TO THE STUDY  
  
This study has its origins from an earlier study on ‘Children’s understanding of natural  
phenomena’ (Pauka, 1988) and relates back to the first author’s early years of teaching  
secondary school science (1978-1983) and his involvement in writing distance learning  
materials (1983-1986 and 1989-1994) in which the importance of traditional knowledge  
that most students bring to science classes had not been researched in detail except in  
Kelontii’s (1996) study. This interest allowed him to go back to his village of ‘Lelefiru’  
where he interviewed eight village elders on their understanding of natural phenomena  
between October and November of 1997.
  
The first author had continued to maintain strong ties between his village and his  
growing-up in Port Moresby in the late 1950s and early 1960s after his parents moved  
there. His parents were among the first ‘Toaripi’ people to move into Port Moresby,
first as an indentured labourer  (his dad) and then as a family group (his mother) after  
World War 2 (Ryan, 1989). He remembers that his mother said that she and his elder  
sister sailed on a‘ lagatoi’ (double hulled canoe with crab-claw sails) during one of the  
last of the famous Hiri Trade expeditions back to Motuan villages around Port Moresby.
During the early Hiri expeditions in 1940s, the Motuans  traded their clays pots for the  
sago and betelnuts of the Elema  people in the Gulf Province (Kiki, 1963). It was also  
through the many stories that his parents told of a big village called ‘Lelefiru’  near the  
sea and how the villagers used to paddle up and down a once fast flowing ‘Meporo’  
river to cut and make sago and plant new gardens. The name ‘Lelefiru’  if separated into  
‘lele’  meaning ‘a bird called an egret’ and ‘firu’’ meaning ‘an island’, therefore fully it  
means ‘island of the egrets’. Most interesting of all was that this long beach near the  
village has been eroded gradually away by the sea; village elders like his mother, blame  
the event on the use of magic spells (‘seseva’). It is beliefs such as this that interested  
him into identifying the common ideas and beliefs that village elders hold on natural  
phenomena.
  


 8  
  
As these villager elders live within reach of their own natural environments, perhaps  
maybe they would have an in-depth understanding in explaining certain ideas (Waldrip  
& Taylor, 1999b). As a result, this led to several interviews which probed the elder’s  
understanding of occurring natural phenomena. The task was mainly to discover the  
traditional beliefs, worldviews and explanations held by these village elders on natural  
phenomena. The interviews were conducted on the front veranda of the first author’s  
brother-in-law’s house. It was a comfortable and relaxing atmosphere with conditions  
very warm at that time between October and November of 1997 because it was during  
one of the worst droughts in PNG.
The number of terrorist events recorded in this statistic varies considerably from 125 in 
1968 to 665 in 1987.5 Since reaching a peak in the late 1980s, the number of incidents has 
been on the decline. This finding contrasts with the general notion that terrorism has 
become an ever-increasing threat. The number of people killed in terrorist incidents also 
varies considerably, from 34 in 1968 to 3,250 in 2001. No clear trend is visible and the 
series is greatly influenced by spectacular events, such as the simultaneous bombing of 
the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 and the attacks of September 11,
2001. As these series exhibit, the level of international terrorist acts is on the decline,
while the number of fatalities has not been reduced as much. This implies that terrorism 
has become increasingly lethal – a common observation made by scholars studying 
terrorism. According to Enders and Sandler (2002), an incident in recent years is about 17 
percentage points more likely to result in casualties than in the 1970s. This increase in 
lethality has been attributed to the increasing proportion of fundamentalist terrorist 
                                                   5 It is, however, important to keep in mind that international terrorist acts are only a small fraction of all terrorist attacks taking place. In the years 1998 to 2002, the number of recorded domestic terrorist incidents was around 11 times higher than the number of international terrorist incidents; the respective number for fatalities is around 4 times higher (see the RAND-MIPT Terrorism Databases; www.mipt.org).


- 6 -

groups seeking mass casualties of innocent people to make their cause more widely 
known. In contrast, the leftist-based terrorists and nationalist terrorists want to instigate a 
revolution and aim at winning the hearts of the people. They therefore avoid killing or 
maiming innocent people not directly connected with the existing political and economic 
regime.
Further, using spectral analysis on a quarterly index of various terrorist activities 
(ITERATE, International Terrorism: Attributes of Terrorist Events; see Mickolus 1982 
and Mickolus et al. 1989; 1993), a number of cycles have been identified (Enders and 
Sandler 2002). Logistically complicated incidents, such as large-scale suicide car 
bombings, the hijacking of planes and assassinations have longer cycles than less 
sophisticated events. Terrorist activity developing in cycles, rather than as a continuous 
movement in one direction, has been attributed to various causes: demonstration and 
imitation effects act as propagators; economies of scale in planning terrorist incidents 
lower the cost for a restricted period of time; after a terrorist act there is a public outcry,
inducing the authorities to take drastic measures which, again for a restricted period of 
time, reduce international terrorist activity. This “attack-counterattack cycle” results in 
fluctuations.
12. The full essay is available at: http://cecelia.physics.indiana.edu/life/moon/ Apollo8/122568sci-nasa-macleish.html [accessed 9 September 2005].
13. We conducted a survey of 24 hours of broadcast output on four television channels available in the UK: BBC2, one of the two public service channels paid for by licence fees; ITV, the network of regional UK commercial terrestrial broadcasters; Channel 4, the national terrestrial television channel, focusing on arts and public affairs programmes and minority interests not provided for on ITV; and CNN, the international satellite news network, based in Atlanta, but broadcasting throughout the world.
14. As Jackie Stacey observes, amongst the products of consumer culture the global is often signified by reference to the exotic otherness of particular, often third-world cultures and people (Franklin, Lury and Stacey 2000: 98–109).
15. This research was funded by the Countryside Agency, Cumbria County Council, the Forestry Commission and  Lancaster University and was conducted by Sue Holden and Bronislaw Szerszynski. The three focus groups conducted in February 1999 were chosen to be representative of the main types of settlement in the area. The three groups that met in July 1999 were chosen to exhibit differing degrees of 
detach themselves from the particular – from their particular place, from their particular gods, from their particular cosmos – in order to attain cosmopolitan emancipation. Perhaps we need to fashion such a form of ‘cos-mopolitics’ if we are not all to be fated to become mere visitors in our own worlds.
(Date accepted: November 2005) 





Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 129 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 
engagement with conservation and consultation, and with the Internet as a communications medium. The Internet consultation ran for 20 weeks, and had 243 visitors over that period (for more information, see Szerszynski and Holden 2000).
16. See http://www.commonground.org.uk [accessed 9 September 2005].
Territorialization of Belgium’s language problem and uneven economic development    
The ‘Belgian condition’ is commonly analysed in terms of three cleavages: language,  religion and class (Huyse 1980). While it is tempting to take these cleavages for  granted as primordial or objectively grounded in economic relations, a CPE approach  interprets them as socially constituted bases of personal and collective identity, social  practices, and social mobilization. Their durability as alternative lines of cleavage  nonetheless depends on their embedding in material as well as discursive practices  that are changing and changeable and whose relative weight and structural coupling  can vary (and, indeed, be made to vary through appropriate strategic interventions) in  space-time. Religion has been marginal in the anchoring debate but it was (and to  some extent remains) a major constitutive force in Belgian life through the powerful  material and ideological influence of the Christian church within the education  system, in labour organization in Flanders (as opposed to its minor influence over the  Walloon labour class), its support for Belgian francophone nation-building, and its  links to moderate Flemish nationalism. Language is significant for the state as well as  civil society because of the traditional strong francophone bias in recruiting state  managers, elite formation more generally, and the organization (and fracturing) of  power blocs and subaltern groups. And class is grounded, of course, in social  relations of production that are differentially articulated with, and imprinted by,  religious and linguistic differences.


 16  
These considerations open the space to explore the discursive and material factors  and processes that shape the relative weight and differential articulation of these  cleavages and their changing significance for social action in particular conjunctures.  A CPE perspective would ask how social groups come to be constituted as collective  subjects with their own distinctive modes of calculation – whether these are  discursively and materially based in class, religious or ethno-linguistic differences or  some combination thereof – and how these identities become consolidated as bases  of social mobilization. An adequate answer requires a more critical and constructivist  approach to the genealogy of these antagonisms. This is certainly more than we get  in Mandel’s well-known analysis (1963) of the dialectic of region and class in  Belgium. For, while we share his concern with the uneven economic development of  the capitalist space economy, Mandel fails to examine how regions and their  inhabitants were imagined and institutionalised as objects of economic, political, or  social and as subjects whose primary identity was as class, religious, or linguistic  subjects. He pre-supposes instead the historically immanent unification of the  Belgian working class through the general logic of proletarianization and claims that  this was blocked in the case of Flanders as regional conflicts intensified.
To show that there was nothing pre-given, let alone unchanging, about these three  cleavages, we show how each emerged and has been transformed over time and  how all three have come to be articulated in different ways at different times. We also  show that changes in their relative significance and structural coupling are mediated  not only through emergent, unintended, and, perhaps, unacknowledged structural  shifts but also through the mobilization of relevant social forces around competing  social imaginaries. This requires a stylized CPE account of Belgian political economy  as the history of the making, unmaking and remaking of collective subjects, their  uneven institutionalisation, and the eventual consolidation into power structures. We  address economic, linguistic, and religious identities in turn without seeking to imply  through this order of presentation that the economy is somehow determinant,  whether in the first or even last instance.
They expect that the continued terror (of a size similar to the number of deaths due to car 
accidents) will decrease annual consumption per capita by about 5% in 2004.
4. Investment. The effect of terrorism on aggregate consumption and savings is important 
as it influences the investment level and, hence, economic growth. In addition, one can 
hypothesize that political violence not only affects the level of investments but also the 
composition of investments (Collier 1999). Investments in non-traded capital goods, or 
non-residential construction, are particularly risky in an environment of political 
instability. Such investments may, therefore, be reduced more than investments in 
machinery and equipment if political violence increases. Using a macro-econometric 
quarterly time-series model of investment in Israel for the period 1988-1998, conditioned 
on indicators of political instability, Fielding (2003b) investigates the impact of political 
instability on the level and composition of investments. To analyze the impact on the 
composition of investments, two investment equations, one for non-traded capital goods 
and one for machinery and equipment, are estimated. As an increase in investment in one 
category has a positive effect on investments in the other category, the dynamic effect 
between these two categories is important in calculating the total effect. The indicators of 
political instability are the number of Jews killed, the number of Palestinians killed and 
the rate of growth of the Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza areas. Fielding 
(2003b) finds both the number of Israelis killed and the rate of growth of Jewish 
settlements to have a significantly negative impact on investment in non-residential 


- 13 -

construction. Manufacturing and equipment investment is significantly lowered by an 
increase in the total number of deaths and the rate of growth of settlements.9 Again, a 
“peace dividend”, or the implicit increase in investment from a complete cessation of the 
conflict, can be estimated. Were the number of deaths to drop to zero, construction 
investment would be 27.9% higher and machinery and equipment investment would be 
14.6% higher in the steady state. The different magnitude of these two effects confirms 
that investment composition is affected by political violence. In comparison to the impact 
of fatalities, the likely impact of a cessation of the expansion of settlements would again 
be small: the respective figures are 2.77% and 1.10%. Overall, these effects are huge and 
would be even larger if second order effects were taken into consideration. For example,
a stabilization of the political situation is likely to accelerate economic growth and,
therefore, raise investment demand even further.
6. Stock markets. In the aftermath of spectacular attacks, the impact on financial markets 
is usually widely discussed in the media. Stock prices are a potentially informative 
measure of the economic damage of terrorism. Stock prices reflect expected future gains 
of a company, as well as the likelihood that these expected gains materialize. Terrorist 
attacks influence both: (i) Expected profits are lower if security measures increase the 
costs of production and doing business, and if consumers’ fear reduces demand, like in 
the airline industry. (ii) The risk premium is higher when terrorism leads to increased 
uncertainty about a firm’s prospects on the market.10 Empirically, the difficulty is in 
disentangling investors’ decentralized evaluation of a firm’s costs from terrorism, as 
reflected in the stock price, from a host of other factors. When looking for a contra 
factual market capitalization, one has, for example, to take into consideration that stock 
prices already reflect expected terrorist attacks before any event actually occurs. Previous 
research, therefore, has concentrated on single unexpected events or intensifications of 
terrorist activities.
                                                   9 Why the different investment decisions are influenced by different fatality series remains a puzzle (Fielding 2003b, p. 175). 10 The effect of terrorism on the systematic risk (beta) is studied for the events of September 11. In a sample of US firms from various sectors, models with time-varying betas find very heterogeneous effects of the event (Choudhry 2003). For the airline industry around the world, however, there is a clear structural break. Conditional systematic risk, on average, doubled following September 11, 2001, whereby US airlines were most affected (Drakos 2004).
ERIC NEUMAYER 393 


A Review of Quantitative Refugee and Asylum Migration Studies 
Given the political and social attention that the number of asylum seekers has attracted over the last decade or so, there is a surprising lack of quantitative analysis of the causes of these flows. There are more studies either looking at flows of refugees and IDPs in general, who mainly reside in countries in the developing world, or explicitly restricting the analysis to developing countries. We start with a review of these studies before turning to the fewer existing studies of asylum migration to developed countries. Edmonston (1993) finds that the threat of violence and, less clearly, low socio-

economic development explain the number of refugee emigrants per capita in 74 and 130 refugee-generating and -receiving countries in 1986 and 1990, respectively. Apodaca (1998), in her analysis of the relationship between human rights violations and refugee migration in 20 selected developing countries over the period 1985–1994, similarly finds that such violations are strong predictors of consequent refugee flows. With the help of frequency tables, Gibney, Apodaca, and McCann (1996) find that countries with gross human rights violations are those generating high numbers of both refugees and IDPs and that refugees tend to flee to countries with a better human rights record. While providing interesting evidence, these studies have some limitations. One is that they are confined to a selection of countries, where refugee flows have actually taken place on a large scale. This can create sample selection bias. In addition, with the exception of Edmonston’s study, they do not control for other determinants besides human rights violations, which could result in omitted variable bias. Schmeidl (1997) provided one of the first multivariate quantitative analyses of the 
causes of refugees, which includes, in principle, all countries, not just those where people have been turned into refugees. Using ordinary least squares (OLS) in a panel covering the period 1971–1990, she finds that events of ‘‘generalized violence’’ are the main causes of refugees. Genocides/politicides,8 civil wars, particularly if coupled with external military intervention, and, once outliers are deleted, ethnic rebellion force people to migrate. The lagged stock of refugees, which captures the concept of a migration network, is also highly statistically significant. In contrast, she finds no evidence that the type of political regime, as measured by the extent of political freedom, matters. The same is true for economic hardship or poverty as proxied by per capita energy consumption as well as population pressure as proxied by population density. She also finds no robust evidence that external or interstate wars matter. As an explanation for the striking difference between civil and interstate war, she suggests that ‘‘if we assume that refugees flee from where the shooting comes from, internal displacement should be more likely than external flight, since interstate wars are often most intense in border regions’’ (Schmeidl, 1997:304). Many of Schmeidl’s results are confirmed by a similar study undertaken by 
Davenport, Moore, and Poe (2003) of forced migration over the period 1964–1989. Unlike Schmeidl (1997), they include both refugees and IDPs. Given that the search is for the determinants of forced migration, it makes sense to include people who are forced to migrate, but stay within the borders of the country of origin. Contrary to Schmeidl (1997), who looked at refugee emigration, Davenport et al. (2003) analyze net migration defined as refugees leaving the country plus IDPs minus refugees from other countries. As a methodological advancement, they use a fixed-effects (FE) estimator, which ensures unbiasedness of the estimated coefficients, even if the explanatory variables are correlated with unobserved time-invariant, country-specific FE.
8 These refer to the calculated physical destruction of a communal or political group in whole or part (Harff and Gurr, 1988).
Further, most teacher candidates want to teach students like themselves and are not even 
convinced that all students are capable of learning (Gomez, in press; Goodlad 1990; Paine 
1989; Zimpher and Ashburn 1992). While it may be possible to remedy these factors to 
some extent, most teacher education programs as they are currently organized fail to do so.
The literature on teacher learning overwhelming suggests that, even under the best of 
circumstances, teacher education is a weak intervention (Zeichner and Gore 1990). Some 
researchers, like Martin Haberman at the University of Wisconsin—Milwaukee, have argued 
that typical teacher education students who are young and culturally encapsulated are not 
developmentally ready to make the kinds of adjustments needed for successful cross-cultural 
teaching. These researchers are pessimistic about the likelihood that preservice teacher 
education can become a powerful enough intervention to change the attitudes and 


dispositions developed over a lifetime that teacher education students bring to teacher 
education (Haberman 1991).
We clearly need to modify programs to deal with teacher education students' 
shortcomings, as NCATE's proposed refinements related to curriculum design and content,
student body composition, faculty composition and qualifications, and candidate progress 
issues suggest. But it is becoming progressively clear that some selection screens, such as the 
interviews developed by Haberman (1987) to screen candidates for teaching in urban schools,
must also be used to determine potential abilities to be successful cross-cultural teachers. It is 
clear that instead of depending solely on grade point averages, test scores, and glowing 
testimony of young college students wanting to be teachers because they love children, we 
have to find ways, as Haberman says, to focus more on picking the right people rather 
than on changing the wrong ones.
In one of the programs we are studying, The American Indian Cultural Immersion 
Project, students are required to undergo a systematic year-long period of cultural study 
before entry to the program. During this period of time prior to student teaching, students 
attend regular meetings where, under the guidance of program staff, they read and study 
about various American Indian groups , their histories, and lifestyles; read American Indian 
literature; interact with American Indian consultants; etc. It is argued by teacher educators in 
this program that this kind of systematic preadmission orientation program screens out 
people who are not serious about the cultural diversity aspects of the program.
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 733 


of natural resource sustainability and environmental protection+”14 Our study attempts to address the concerns of conventional development economists who see globalization as a source of good, because it promotes growth and development, and environmental economists who argue that globalization may promote profligate patterns of production and consumption that comes at the expense of environmental harm and resource depletion+ 
Supporters of globalization argue that greater interdependence between rich and poor states and the liberalization of markets from the clutches of profligate governments will enhance wealth, increase efficiency, and destroy the barriers against international environmental cooperation+15 Trade liberalization is seen as promoting economic growth,16 which in turn is regarded as beneficial to sustainability, at least in the long run+17 Similarly, FDI is thought to supply poor countries with markets, transfer technology and capital, and above all, provide income growth, employment, and poverty reduction+18 The theoretical argument on the beneficial effect of income growth on sustainability is that poverty supposedly pollutes and that demand for environmental quality is a normal, if not luxury good+ Poor people degrade the environment by using slash-and-burn agriculture, employing outmoded and inefficient production systems, remaining poor by being dependent on natural resource exports, burning biomass that drives the greenhouse effect, and being highly dependent on burning fossil fuels for energy, particularly coal+ Demand for and the economy’s capacity to supply strict environmental regulation increases with rising income+19 Empirically, economists have tried to demonstrate the link via the so-called Environmental Kuznets Curve ~EKC!+Accordingly, environmental quality is expected to worsen with increasing income, but only initially, and then improves after a certain threshold, computed by some to be around $5,000 to $8,000 per capita, depending on which pollutant one looks at+20 
In addition to the income effect, trade and FDI allow the efficient allocation of resources across the world, where a country specializes in those activities it has an advantage in so that countries with an abundance of one resource can trade with those that are abundant in another, thereby achieving maximum output for a given input—in other words movement toward sustainability because waste is mini-

14+ Mikesell 1992, 141+ 15+ Some scholars estimate the impact of globalization on government spending to assess whether 
governments “race to the bottom+” Much evidence seems to suggest that governments adapt to the increasing competition by compensating society with public goods, such as education+ See Adserà and Boix 2002; Garrett 1998; and Rodrik 1996+ 
16+ See Krueger 1998; Greenaway, Morgan, and Wright 1998; Frankel and Romer 1999; and Wacziarg and Welch 2003+ 
17+ See Bhagwati 2004; and Frankel 2003+ 18+ See Borensztein, de Gregorio, and Lee 1998; Cooper 2001; de Mello 1999; de Soysa and Oneal 
1999; and Klein, Aaron, and Hadjimichael 2001+ 19+ Copeland and Taylor 2003+ 20+ Grossman and Krueger 1995+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 4042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:734 
?
?
?
734 International Organization 


mized+21 Openness to trade is also associated with getting prices right and ending distortions, which enhances sustainability+ Governments are likely to subsidize economic activity for political reasons, thereby increasing waste, a policy that is highly costly and becomes increasingly untenable the more exposed a country is to global markets+22 Economic openness is therefore often taken as a proxy for good economic policies+ Open trading regimes are also more amenable to spreading newer, better technologies faster than more closed regimes+23 Because environmentally friendly production is likely to be lucrative as people value the environment more, such production technologies will be adopted faster where the market determines the prices+ The adoption of such technologies across integrated space may lead to the “leveling up” when laggards are forced by the market to standardize+24 Liberals therefore conclude that autarkic policies and government-dominated markets cause high environmental damage and low output+ The experience of state planning exemplified by the former Soviet Union demonstrates that unsustainable management of resources, inefficient economic production, and inadequate channels for civil society to affect policies results in bad outcomes for people and the planet+25 Globalization critics therefore “fight the wrong enemy+”26 
Finally, while both camps recognize that protecting the global commons requires real international cooperation, with some even calling for a World Environment Organization to rival the World Trade Organization, free traders view the interdependence among countries as a potent driver of environmental cooperation+27 Countries more open to trade are more likely to have signed and ratified important multilateral environmental agreements+28 In this light, states that trade more with each other potentially have common cause and incentive to cooperate, an age old precept articulated most thoroughly by such philosophers as Immanuel Kant, Montesquieu, and the Manchester school+29 
Critics counter these arguments by stating that globalization exploits poor countries and constrains the degree to which they are able to achieve sustainability+ Some highly popularized, anecdotal and journalistic arguments suggest that global-

21+ Brack 1995+ 22+ See Birdsall and Wheeler 1993; and Yu 1994+ 23+ Perkins and Neumayer 2004+ 24+ The German decision to make catalytic converters mandatory in new cars, for example, was 
largely because car manufacturers were already tooled to produce cars for the U+S+ market, which had required catalytic converters almost a decade previously+ This effect is called the trading-up of environmental standards+ See Vogel 1995+ 
Q125+ The Aral sea catastrophe makes one wonder whether any planner in the USSR asked whether the cotton was worth the sea+ Possibly, fish and tourism, among other activities, might have been more economical, not to mention beneficial in other respects too, for the people of the area+ Such examples of environmental waste are quite numerous across the globe+ See Ascher 1999+ 
26+ Graham 2000+ 27+ Haas, Keohane, and Levy 1993+ 28+ Neumayer 2002a+ 29+ Russett and Oneal 2001+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 5042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:735 
?
We find that particularly individuals with time constraints, who watch TV for many hours, report lower life satisfaction and that watching TV is positively related to people’s material aspirations, as well as to anxiety levels, and negatively related to their financial satisfaction, to their trust in others, as well as to the perceived relative frequency of social activities. Section 2 of this paper discusses TV viewing as a major activity in modern life.
Section 3 develops the basic testable hypothesis. The following Section 4 presents the data and Section 5 gives the results of the basic econometric estimates and integrates them into the existing literature on TV and happiness. The next section deals with the possibility of reverse causation and addresses the role of opportunity costs of time and of changes in preferences and beliefs. Section 7 concludes.
2. TV viewing 
Leisure activity today is dominated by television. The reduction in (paid and unpaid) working hours achieved over the past decades, resulting in more leisure time, has to a large extent been replaced by watching television. According to time use studies (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, p. 338–347, see also Aguiar & Hurst, 2007; Bittman, 1998; Gershuny,
B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 285 


2000; Goodin, Rice, Bittman, & Saunders, 2005), the average leisure time of adult Americans (19–64 years of age) over the period 1965–1995 rose by 6.2 h from 34.8 to 41 h.1 In the same period of time, TV viewing time rose by 6 h. In 1995, the average American spent 16 h a week, or 2 14 h a day, in front of the TV.
Similar trends can be observed for other industrialized countries.2 Between the 60s and 90s, leisure time in those countries (for adults aged 20–59) rose, on average and controlling for structural changes, by well over 6–36 h per week (Bittman, 1998).3 At the end of the 90s, according to time use studies, TV viewing time in European countries4 averaged between almost 2–2 34 h a day, or between 14 and 19 h per week (Aliga & Winqvist, 2003). 20% of the respondents in the European Social Survey 2002/03 indicated that they watch TV for more than 3 h per day.
Television rating agencies report even higher average viewing times than time use studies: on average, in 2004, Americans (age 16 and older) watched close to 5 h, and Europeans (about age 15 and older)5 about 3 34 h a day (IP Germany, 2005). This is due to the fact that other age groups are represented (especially the retired devote more than average time to TV watching) and that the electronic measuring instruments (so-called people’s meters) cannot distinguish between primary, secondary and tertiary activities. It is known that many people engage in multi-tasking, for instance watching TV at the same time as cooking. But exclusive TV viewing is still a major activity taking up almost 70% of total TV time (Grahn, Lehmann, Schmitz, & Breinker, 2003; Robinson & Godbey, 1999).
The language of landscape and of cosmopolitanism is thus a language of mobility, of abstract characteristics and comparison. It is not just that such mobility is necessary if one is to develop the capacity to be reflexive about landscape. It is also that landscape talk is itself an expression of the life-world of mobile groups. The multiple mobilities of ‘liquid modernity’ (Bauman 2000) have produced a widespread capacity for aesthetic judgment that in turn feeds into and animates global tourism as well as the environmental movement and notions of the cosmopolitan. Yet this is a judgment from afar, not necessarily ‘grounded’, a judgment possessive and abstract. James Buzard suggests that William Wordsworth’s The Brother signifies ‘the beginning of modernity . . . a time when one stops belonging to a culture and can only tour it’ (Buzard 1993: 27). If this is so, then perhaps the ‘cosmopolitan moment’ represents the completion of the process that started at the time of Wordsworth. Places have turned into a collection of abstract characteristics in a mobile world, ever easier to be visited, appreciated and compared, but not known from within. If our destiny is to become cosmopolitan, perhaps it is also to find pleasure in place only through an unrelenting visual economy of signs.17 
Conclusion 
In their introduction to this special issue, Beck and Sznaider suggest that it is only when cosmopolitan ways of thinking and perceiving become incorporated into people’s identities, rituals and dispositions that the former can become an effective force in the world (Beck and Sznaider 2006: 7–8). Our own research found that this blending of universalistic dispositions and particularistic local cultures does indeed seem to be occurring amongst certain social groups  (Szerszynski and Urry 2002: 476). Yet at the same time our current exploration of the relationship between visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan has suggested that this blending can radically transform the very character of the particular and the local in a way that is not necessarily an unalloyed civilizational gain: that humans are increasingly seeing and experiencing the world from afar, ‘at home’ only within the multiple mobilities of late modernity.
However, we do not want to appear to suggest that there is an inevitable irreconcilability between cosmopolitan openness on the one hand and dwelling in place on the other. Rather, it may simply be the case that we need to explore, both conceptually and practically, alternative kinds of cosmopolitanism in which this tension is avoided or overcome. In a similar vein, Bruno Latour (2004) has called for a form of cosmopolitanism that does not require us to leave our attachments at the door, one in which people are not asked to 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 127 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


128 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 
Notes 
1. The authors would like to thank their colleagues on the two research projects that are drawn upon in the article – Greg Myers and Mark Toogood (‘Global Citizenship and the Environment’) and Sue Holden (‘Public Perceptions of Landscape Character in West Cumbria’) – for the many stimulating conversations about the significance of the projects’ findings. They would also like to thank the anonymous referees for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
2. It is also beyond the scope of this paper to explore the – often violent – resistances to cosmopolitanization that have erupted around the world in recent years.
3. www.world-tourism.org/newsroom/ Releases/2005/january/2004numbers.htm [accessed 9 September 2005].
4. www.world-tourism.org/facts/eng/ vision.htm [accessed 9 September 2005].
5 . w w w. w o r l d - t o u r i s m . o r g / f a c t s / metho.html [accessed 9 September 2005].
psychological anomalies play a major role. A vital aspect is that the disparity between 
gains and losses matters. It is therefore important whether one asks what people would be 
prepared to pay in order to reduce terrorism, or what they would be prepared to accept in 
order to tolerate some degree of terrorism. Second, terrorism is an international 
phenomenon and terrorists often have no difficulty in moving from one country to 
another. For this reason, the anti-terrorism policies of a particular country produce 
international or even global externalities. An anti-terrorism policy that successfully 
prevents terrorists from attacking a particular country increases the probability of attacks 
in other countries (Lee 1988; Sandler and Lapan 1988). On the other hand, anti-terrorism 
policies, based on positive incentives (Frey and Luechinger 2003; 2004), entail positive 
externalities for other countries. The dimension of the relevant population, whose values 
for security from a specific terrorist campaign should be sought, is a question of values.
Another problem with a contingent valuation survey is that individuals evaluate specific 
objects or specific victims quite differently from a non-specified, or statistical, victim 
(Schelling 1968; Small and Loewenstein 2003). People are prepared to spend much less 
on efforts to save as yet unidentified lives than identified lives from terrorist attacks.
Contingent valuation surveys may nevertheless provide valuable insights into the utility 
losses imposed by terrorism. So far there is only one survey study that examines the 
trade-off between money and terrorism risk (Viscusi and Zeckhauser 2003). The main 
research interest of this study, however, is whether the answers reflect a rational response 
to terrorism risks. The subjects were asked what increase in the price of a plane ticket 


- 21 -

they would be willing to pay if the risk of a terrorist attack on an airplane were to be 
reduced (a) by 50%, (b) to one in a million per flight, (c) to one in 10 million per flight or 
finally (d) to zero. The average increase in price subjects are willing to pay for a plane 
ticket is (a) ca. 25%, (b) ca. 38%, (c) ca. 53% and (d) ca. 70% respectively. These 
estimates reflect a well-known premium for reaching a zero risk level (see Kahneman and 
Tversky 1979 for the “certainty effect”).
2. The hedonic market approach is based on the idea that markets, primarily the housing 
and the labor markets, reflect the utility losses imposed on individuals by terrorist 
activity.15 Higher wages must be paid to compensate employees for the disamenities 
incurred by working in a region ridden with terrorism. Similarly, the rent for housing and 
land to be paid is negatively affected by terrorism. In equilibrium, the marginal implicit 
compensations associated with working or living in a region plagued by terrorism equals 
the corresponding marginal willingness to accept. To our knowledge, no study employs 
the hedonic market approach in particular, or revealed preference methods in general, to 
evaluate the consequences of terrorism.
A major drawback of the hedonic market approach is that it is based on the assumption 
that the market is perfect and in equilibrium, and fully reflects changes in the amount and 
intensity of terrorism. The adjustment that people are likely to make in response to 
changes in the intensity of a terrorist campaign, as well as changes in the supply side of 
the hedonic property market, needs to be accounted for (Freeman 2003, pp. 373 and 381).
Similarly, it might be difficult to isolate the effects of terrorism from those caused by 
government reactions. Indirect estimations of utility losses can only be applied if the 
individuals are aware of changes in the terrorism risk over time and/or differences across 
regions. Individuals’ difficulties in assessing terrorism risk may, therefore, hamper the 
application of revealed preference methods (see e.g. Downes-Le Guin and Hoffman 
1993; Sunstein 2003; Viscusi and Zeckhauser 2003). This also implies that unanticipated 
and cataclysmic terrorist acts cannot be evaluated. Further, revealed preferences may 
                                                   15 Exemplary contributions are Blomquist et al. (1988) and Chay and Greenstone (2001). Another revealed preference method that potentially allows for the assessment of utility losses due to terrorism is the defense expenditure approach or averting behavior method. The basic idea of this method is that individuals’ evaluation for a change in the provision of a public good is reflected in accompanying changes in expenditures for substitutive private goods (see e.g. Zeckhauser and Fisher 1976).
Various writers have commented upon the likely consequences of such multiple mobilities. Flows of information, knowledge, money, commodities, people and images ‘have intensified to the extent that the sense of spatial distance which separated and insulated people from the need to take into account all the other people which make up what has become known as humanity has become eroded’ (Featherstone 1993: 169). Sensations of other people and places create an awareness of interdependence, encouraging the development of a notion of ‘panhumanity’, combining a universalistic conception of human rights with a cosmopolitan awareness of difference (Franklin, Lury and Stacey 2000; UNDP 2000). Perhaps counterintuitively, then, these multiple mobilities may provide the context in which the notion of universal rights, relating not only to humans but also to animals and environments, comes to constitute a framing for collective action. Illustrations of such panhumanity include the 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 117 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


wide range of what we can call ‘global gift-giving’, the giving to distant (unknown) others of money, time, objects, software and information or  political support (through mega-events like Live Aid and Live 8, local events or the Internet).
But the expanding forms of corporeal, imaginative and virtual travel described above are also transforming the conditions of visuality. John Barrell describes how in the early nineteenth century the mobility of the British upper class throughout Europe provided extensive cultural capital for developing a capacity to imagine what other places were like visually. He argues that ‘the aristocracy and gentry . . . had experience of more landscapes than one, in more geographical regions than one; and even if they did not travel much they were accustomed, by their culture, to the notion of mobility, and could easily imagine other landscapes’ (Barrell 1972: 63). Through physical and then imaginative travel the British upper class expanded their repertoire of landscapes for visual consumption and comparison. In the next section we start to explore how similar transformations in contemporary visuality might be altering the nature of citizenship.
Citizenship and the visual 
Visuality has played a number of important roles in the long and complex history of citizenship. Both the citizen, and the sense of a polity of which he or she is a member, have been brought to presence through specific ways of seeing and being seen. Firstly, then, citizenship implies relations of mutual visibility between citizen and citizen. From its emergence in the Greek city-state, citizenship was understood as a mode of human interaction in which individuals could appear to each other, face-to-face, in a public theatre (Arendt 1958). This understanding enjoyed a revival in eighteenth-century Europe with new social spaces, such as the coffeehouse and the salon, in which the (male) bourgeoisie could assemble (Habermas 1989). Secondly, modern citizenship also depends on relations of mutual visibility between the citizen and the state. Citizens have become not just watchers of royal spectacle but also objects of state surveillance and monitoring (Foucault 1977). And in liberal democracies there is an increased demand on public authorities for more rationalized, open and accountable forms of behaviour and visibility. Thirdly, visual symbols are frequently used in totemic fashion to signify membership of a civic or political community (Franklin 2001). Some are official and formal (flags, coats of arms); others are unofficial and arise informally (graffiti, bumper stickers, modes of dress). Some are mobile and carried around on the person (lapel badges, passports, coins); others are fixed, and are to be visited, represented or imagined (monuments, battlegrounds). Fourthly, being part of a community of co-watchers can play an important role in people’s sense of themselves as  
118 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


citizens, through routine, daily events such as the reading of daily newspapers (Billig 1995), through extraordinary, planned events such as sports events or presidential inaugurations (Dayan and Katz 1992), and through extraordinary, unplanned events, such as revolutions, disasters, rescues or deaths (see Richards, Wilson and Woodhead 1999).

Rotating Night Shifts and Risk of Breast Cancer in Women Participating in the Nurses’ Health Study 
Eva S. Schernhammer, Francine Laden, Frank E. Speizer, Walter C. Willett, David J. Hunter, Ichiro Kawachi, Graham A. Colditz 
Background: Melatonin shows potential oncostatic action, and light exposure during night suppresses melatonin production. There is little information, however, about the direct effect of night work on the risk of cancer. We investigated the effect of night work in breast cancer. Methods: We examined the relationship between breast cancer and working on rotating night shifts during 10 years of follow-up in 78 562 women from the Nurses’ Health Study. Information was ascertained in 1988 about the total number of years during which the nurses had worked rotating night shifts with at least three nights per month. From June 1988 through May 1998, we documented 2441 incident breast cancer cases. Logistic regression models were used to calculate relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs), adjusted for confounding variables and breast cancer risk factors. All statistical tests were two-sided. Results:We observed a moderate increase in breast cancer risk among the women who worked 1–14 years or 15–29 years on rotating night shifts (multivariate adjusted RR = 1.08 [95% CI = 0.99 to 1.18] and RR = 1.08 [95% CI = 0.90 to 1.30], respectively). The risk was further increased among women who worked 30 or more years on the night shift (RR = 1.36; 95% CI = 1.04 to 1.78). The test for trend was statistically significant (P = .02). Conclusions: Women who work on rotating night shifts with at least three nights per month, in addition to days and evenings in that month, appear to have a moderately increased risk of breast cancer after extended periods of working rotating night shifts. [J Natl Cancer Inst 2001;93:1563–8] 
The suprachiasmatic nucleus in the hypothalamus, one of the most important 
physiologic determinants of alertness and performance, drives a circadian pacemaker in mammals, with an intrinsic period averaging 24 hours. Light is the primary stimulus to disrupt and reset this pacemaker, which is expressed in changing melatonin rhythms. Light exposure at night may, therefore, be related to a variety of behavioral changes and associated health problems not yet well explored. Studies (1) have suggested an increased risk of coronary heart disease among rotating night shift workers, not fully explained by an increased prevalence of coronary risk factors. Others have linked night work to an increased breast cancer risk among women (2).
Melatonin, the “hormone of the darkness,” has only recently gained substantial attention from the scientific community with regard to its potential oncostatic actions and its possible effect on breast cancer risk (3–10).Melatonin serum levels in humans decrease when people are exposed to light at night (11). Suppressed serum melatonin levels might enhance tumor development (12). Observational studies (2,13–15) are compatible with an effect of melatonin on breast cancer risk, reporting meaningful increases in breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women exposed to shiftwork. Recently, a tumor-promoting effect of light exposure was demonstrated on chemically induced tumors in rodents (16). To date, melatonin has been shown to be oncostatic for a variety of tumor cells in experimental carcinogenesis (17–26). The evidence of a relation between melatonin and oncogenesis in humans is conflicting (27), but the majority of reports indicate protective action (28).
Several mechanisms have been hypothesized to explain an association between melatonin and breast cancer. Cohen et al. (29) proposed that loss of pineal function and the resulting decreased melatonin serum levels may increase reproductive hormone levels and, in particular, estradiol levels, thereby increasing the growth and proliferation of hormone-sensitive cells in the breast. More recent research focuses on potential mechanisms through which melatonin is directly onco-static. Melatonin is believed to have antimitotic activity by affecting directly hor-mone-dependent proliferation through interaction with nuclear receptors (4). Another explanation is that melatonin increases the expression of the tumor suppressor gene p53 (3). Cells lacking p53 
have been shown to be genetically unstable and thus more prone to tumors (30).
Another explanation for the high levels of physical aggression at school entry is that aggressive kindergarten children follow trajectories that started much earlier (Hay, Castle, & Davies, 2000; Keenan & Wakschlag, 2000). The few studies that have focused on physically aggressive behaviors during infancy and toddlerhood show that occasional use of aggression is common among preschool children (Dionne, Tremblay, Boivin, Laplante, & Pe´russe, 2003; Goodenough, 1931; Tremblay et al., 1999; Tremblay et al., 2004). Moreover, two recent studies on the development of PA or conduct problems from toddlerhood to middle childhood support the possibility that aggression in kindergarten reflects the continuation of a behavior pattern that began in the preschool years.
First, the NICHD ECCRN (2004) distinguished among five groups of children with distinct trajectories of PA between the 2 years of age and the third grade. The sample included 1,100 children and their mother recruited at 10 selected sites in the US. Fifteen percent of the children exhibited moderate levels of PA while 3% exhibited high levels. Second, Shaw, Gilliom, Ingoldsby, and Nagin (2003) distinguished among four groups of boys with distinct levels of conduct problems between the ages of 2 and 8 years among their sample of low income boys (n = 284). Six percent of those boys already exhibited elevated levels in toddlerhood and maintained high levels in middle childhood (Shaw et al., 2003). Thus, some preschoolers may already present levels of aggression that represent a risk for future problems, and the elevated levels of aggression observed in school age children might be the continuation of a pattern that started in toddlerhood.
Together these studies suggest the existence of two different developmental pathways of PA: one that begins before school entry and one that begins at school entry. These pathways are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Some children may follow rising trajectories, while others may follow declining trajectories. In fact, aggression during the preschool years is characterized by substantial variability in its frequency and stability (Dionne et al., 2003; Keenan & Shaw, 1994; Munson, McMahon, & Spieker, 2001). Thus, groups of children with distinct (and potentially opposite) developmental trajectories of PA could be identified.
Note that the studies mentioned above either examined the development of PA among preschool children (Tremblay et al., 2004), or among elementary school age children (Broidy et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999), using at risk samples (e.g., low socioeconomic status boys; 
Nagin & Tremblay, 1999; Shaw et al., 2003), samples representative of specific areas (NICHD ECCRN, 2004), small samples (e.g., Hay et al., 2000) or clinically referred children (Keenan & Wakschlag, 2000). To our knowledge, no study has provided information on the developmental trajectories of PA from toddlerhood to pre-adolescence using a nationally representative sample that includes both girls and boys. This was one aim of the present study.
Factors Associated with Atypical Developmental Patterns of Physical Aggression 
One implicit assumption about the identification of heterogeneity in a population is that the groups exhibiting atypical development have specific risk characteristics. For instance, Nagin and Tremblay (2001) found that chronically physically aggressive boys (between the ages of 6 and 15 years) from low socioeconomic areas were more likely to have mothers who started childbearing early and who had low levels of education than the boys with low or decreasing use of PA. Similar predictors (i.e., early child bearing, low SES) were found to predict the highest PA trajectory in the preschool years (Tremblay et al., 2004). The NICHD ECCRN (2004) study found that higher levels of socio demographic risk (e.g., poverty, low maternal education, single parenting), as well as less sensitive and involved parenting during the course of childhood were associated with higher and more stable trajectories of PA. Finally, in the Shaw et al. (2003) study, boys who exhibited persistent conduct problems were more fearless and more likely to have experienced maternal rejection. These results suggest that similar risk factors are predictive of children’s stable tendencies to manifest conduct problems (more generally) or physical aggression (specifically), whether they are measured during the preschool period or at the beginning of schooling.
Some scholars argue that terrorism could also be a reaction to irresponsible tourism 
development (e.g. Aziz 1995, p. 93, for Egypt). In the aforementioned study for Spain by 
Enders and Sandler (1991), the argument is empirically assessed. It is found that causality 
is unidirectional, i.e. terrorism affects the inflow of tourists, but not the reverse.
The figures presented so far measure how the tourism industry in a particular country (or 
region) is affected by terrorist attacks taking place in that country (or region). However,
two interdependencies between different countries’ tourism industries and their terrorist 
campaigns are possible. On the one hand, the deterrent effect of terrorism on tourists in a 
particular country may benefit the tourism industries in alternative destinations. On the 
other hand, tourists may fear that terrorism could spill over into countries previously not 
involved and, therefore, abstain from visiting neighboring countries. Though the 
substitution effect and the contagion effect (or negative externality) are countervailing,
they can be simultaneously present. The regional interdependencies are explicitly 
modeled in the analysis of Drakos and Kutan (2003). Using monthly data for the period 
1991 to 2000 and employing the SURE method, they investigate the effect of terrorism in 
Greece, Israel and Turkey on each other’s market share, with Italy serving as a control 
country, representing the rest of the Mediterranean region. Their findings indicate that 
there are significant substitution effects. But there is also empirical evidence for the 
contagion effect: only around 11% of aggregate loss in market shares is directed toward 
other destinations within the group of countries under consideration, whereas around 89% 
flows out of the region. Enders et al. (1992) study the effects of terrorism for a series of 
European countries. They estimate the aggregate losses in revenue for Austria, Greece 
and Italy to amount to $ 4.467 billion. Although they find no significant effect of 
terrorism in other continental European countries on the tourism revenues, the loss of 
tourism revenues due to terrorism for continental Europe as a whole is estimated to be 
$16.145 billion. Therefore, continental Europe as a whole is much more negatively 
affected by terrorism than the sum of the country-by-country effects would imply. This 
result is again evidence for a contagion effect or negative externalities.


- 10 -

A note of caution is in order with regard to the temporal patterns of the impact of 
terrorism on tourism.7 The temporal pattern depends on the type of attacks in a particular 
country, and the market structure as well as the type of time-series used by researchers.
Time-series on the number of actual visits are likely to respond more quickly to a terrorist 
incident than time-series on tourism revenues, due to long-term contracts between tourist 
destinations and tour operators. Nevertheless, surprisingly different time spans are 
estimated until tourism begins to respond to a terrorist incident after it has elapsed. While 
Enders and Sandler (1991) and Fleischer and Buccola (2002) find relatively immediate 
effects of terrorism on tourism, i.e. after two to three months, for Spain and Israel 
respectively, Enders et al. (1992) find tourism to be unaffected by a terrorist incident 
until a full 18 to 21 months afterwards in the case of continental Europe and Austria 
respectively.
This result indicates that utility losses may far exceed the economic consequences 
discussed in section 3.
5 Concluding remarks 
Much of the research on terrorism, even by economists, is based on the number of 
incidents and casualties. As our survey shows, one can go much further. A sizeable 
literature already exists on the economic consequences of terrorism, such as on tourism,
foreign direct investment, savings and consumption, investment, stock prices, foreign 
trade, the urban economy, and national income and growth. But the studies have so far 
neglected to analyze the utility losses induced by terrorism, which we suggest are much 
larger than the purely economic ones. The standard way of measuring the benefits (or 
costs) of public goods (or bads) is to employ stated preference methods, in particular 


- 25 -

contingent valuation surveys, and revealed preference methods, for example by looking at 
hedonic markets. However, these approaches are faced with considerable problems,
especially when attempting to estimate the utility losses due to terrorism, and have 
therefore not yet been used for that purpose.
We propose a new approach based on life satisfaction or subjective well-being data,
which are collected independently of the data on terrorist activities, and are therefore not 
biased by any immediate priming effects. The estimates presented reveal that terrorism 
leads to considerable reductions in life satisfaction, suggesting that individuals incur large 
utility losses. Individuals would need to receive substantial increases in income to be 
compensated for the harm inflicted by terrorism. The results reported refer to the 
Northern Ireland conflict only. It is certainly necessary to apply the approach to different 
countries, different periods of time and different types of terrorism. Future research 
should undertake systematic comparisons between the standard methods of measuring the 
benefits of public goods and the life satisfaction approach. It should be taken into account 
that the measures of life satisfaction used here could be improved upon. The life 
satisfaction approach should therefore not be criticized solely on the basis of the existing 
quality of subjective well-being measures. Rather, scholars should also evaluate to what 
extent a meaningful relationship between life satisfaction data and terrorist acts can be 
established and econometrically estimated.


 5  
subjectivities, and interests of the forces engaged in political struggle as well as to  transform the state system and its various selectivities. Moreover, in revealing the  socially constructed nature of the phenomena of political economy, CPE involves a  form of political intervention that goes beyond Ideologiekritik (which serves at best to  uncover the ideal and material interests behind specific meaning systems and  ideologies) to explore the semiotic and extra-semiotic mechanisms involved in  selecting and consolidating the dominance and/or hegemony of some meaning  systems and ideologies over others (see below).
Epistemologically, inspired by the Marxian critique of political economy, our approach  to CPE not only critiques the categories and methods of orthodox political economy  but also emphasizes the contextuality and historicity of all claims to knowledge. It  follows that a self-consistent CPE calls for reflexivity on the part of social scientists  about the conditions of their own practices. At the same time, in stressing the  materiality of social relations and their emergent properties, CPE aims to avoid the  temptations of pure social constructivism, according to which social reality is  reducible to participants’ meanings and understandings of their social world. This sort  of reductionism generates an arbitrary account of the social world that ignores the  unacknowledged conditions of action as well as the many and varied emergent  properties of action that go un- or mis-recognized by the relevant actors. It also  ignores the many and varied struggles to transform the conditions of action, actors’  meanings and understandings, and to modify emergent properties. In short, CPE  notes both the constitutive role of semiosis and the emergent extra-semiotic features  of social relations and their impact on capacities for action and transformation.
Methodologically, CPE combines concepts and tools from critical semiotic analysis  with those from critical political economy. Semiosis is an umbrella term for different  approaches to the cultural turn insofar as they assume both that semiosis is causally  efficacious as well as meaningful. This implies that actual events and processes and  their emergent effects can be explained, at least in part, as well as interpreted in  terms of semiosis. Thus CPE studies the role of semiotic practices not only in the  continual (re-)making of social relations but also in the contingent emergence  (variation), privileging (selection), ongoing realization (retention), and subsequent  reinforcement through structural coupling (consolidation) of their extra-semiotic  


 6  
properties. It is the continuing interaction between the semiotic and extra-semiotic in  a complex co-evolutionary process of variation, selection, and retention that gives  relatively successful economic and political imaginaries their performative,  constitutive force in the material world. Our case study illustrates this below (for other  Lancaster examples, see Jessop 2004; Sum 2004, 2005).
Substantively, CPE affirms the overall complexity of the social world and the cognate  importance of complexity reduction as a condition of social action. Adopting a  strategic-relational approach to this process, it assumes that complexity reduction  involves discursively-selective ‘imaginaries’ and structurally-selective institutions.  Imaginaries are semiotic systems that provide the basis for the lived experience of an  inordinately complex world; institutions provide the means of embedding lived  experience in broader social relations and, perhaps, rendering it consistent across  different social spheres. Transferring these abstract ideas to what orthodox  economics misleadingly describes as the macro-level, CPE distinguishes the  ‘actually existing economy’ as the chaotic sum of all economic activities (broadly  defined as concerned with the social appropriation and transformation of nature for  the purposes of substantive provisioning)5 from the 'economy' (or, better, 'economies'  in the plural) as an imaginatively narrated, more or less coherent subset of these  activities occurring within specific spatio-temporal frameworks. The totality of  economic activities is so unstructured and complex that it cannot be an object of  effective calculation, management, governance, or guidance. Instead such practices  are always oriented to subsets of economic relations (economic systems,  subsystems, or ensembles) that have been semiotically and, perhaps  organizationally and institutionally, fixed as appropriate objects of intervention.
Columns 1 and 2 show the estimation results for sub-samples with high and low opportunity costs of time (according to flexibility of working hours). Individuals in the group with high opportunity costs of time, who watch more television than the reference group, report lower life satisfaction ceteris paribus. The effects are quite considerable. The subjective well-being of viewers who watch half an hour and more television a day is between 0.33 and 0.38 points lower than that of light viewers spending less than half an hour watching television a day. The effects are statistically significant at the 99% level. The magnitude of the coefficients corresponds to almost two third of the difference in life satisfaction between people who are divorced and without a partner and married people (0.61), and amounts in the highest category to over one third of the effect of unemployment (#1.11) (both estimates are taken from the full sample). In contrast, for people with low opportunity costs of time, the coefficients of all television viewing categories are smaller (between 0.04 and 0.14) and not statistically significant.
A similar picture emerges when comparing the self-employed, managers, senior officials, legislators and professionals with retirees and unemployed persons (columns 3 and 4 in Table 3). Coefficients in the high opportunity costs of time sub-sample are considerable in size. The average life satisfaction of people watching more than 1.5 h TV a day is between 0.23 and 0.39 points lower compared to people who watch less than half an hour a day. These effects are statistically significant at the 95–99% level. In contrast, for the group with low opportunity costs of time, no correlation between television consumption and reported life satisfaction is visible. The coefficients are not statistically significant and very small. The coefficient for watching 0.5–1.5 h TV is not statistically significant in either group.10 
Of course, the question still arises whether the negative correlation for people with high opportunity costs of time is a causal relationship and, if so, in which direction the causality goes. However, it is difficult to understand why dissatisfied people, who have high opportunity costs of time, resort to TV viewing, while dissatisfied people with low opportunity costs of time do not.
6.2. TV viewing and differences in preferences and beliefs 
When people make decisions about watching TV, they are expected (and assumed to be able) to assess and to adequately take into consideration for themselves the long-term costs of TV viewing. Recent research on the prediction of future utility challenges the assumption 
10 Qualitatively the same results are obtained for both groups if the samples are pooled and interaction terms with the proxy for cost of time are estimated.
298 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


Table 3 Television consumption and life satisfaction: opportunity costs of time 
Dependent variable: Life satisfaction 
Flexibility of working hours as distinction criteria Employment status/profession as distinction criteria 
Group with high opportunity costs of time 
Group with low opportunity costs of time 
Group with high opportunity costs of time 
Group with low opportunity costs of time 
No TV at all #0.355* 0.056 #0.238 #0.251 (#2.33) (0.33) (#1.58) (#1.24) 
Less than 0.5 h TV Reference group 
0.5–1.5 h TV #0.328** #0.072 #0.074 #0.105 (#3.59) (#0.69) (#0.80) (#0.70) 
More than 1.5–2.5 h TV #0.339** #0.041 #0.229* 0.052 (#3.62) (#0.38) (#2.38) (0.35) 
More than 2.5 h TV #0.377** #0.140 #0.389** #0.012 (#3.78) (#1.28) (#3.76) (#0.08) 
Socio-demographic characteristics 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Country-fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Constant 6.203** 5.410** 6.204** 6.919** 
(12.39) (10.45) (10.94) (11.93) Observations 6460 7062 5950 8974 R2 0.14 0.15 0.16 0.22 
Notes: (1) Group 1 contains respondents with flexibility of working hours of 6 and higher on a scale from 0 to 10 and group 2 contains respondents with flexibility of working hours of 5 and lower. In both groups, respondents’ employment status is ‘‘paid work, employed’’ and nothing else. Group 3 contains the self-employed, as well as managers, senior officials, legislators, professionals (according to ISCO-88 classification) with employment status ‘‘paid work’’ (employed or self-employed) 
and nothing else, and group 4 contains retirees and the unemployed with no other employment status. (2) Ordinary least squares estimations. (3) **Significant at 99% level, *significant at 95% level, (*) significant at 90% level.
Blomquist, Glenn C., Mark C. Berger and John P. Hoehn (1988). New Estimates of Quality of Life in Urban Areas. American Economic Review 78(1): 89-107.
Bram, Jason, Andrew Haughwout and James Orr (2002). Has September 11 Affected New York City's Growth Potential? Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 8(2): 81-96.
Brauer, Jurgen (2002). On the Economics of Terrorism. Phi Kappa Phi Forum 82(2).
Brown, Jeffrey R., J. David Cummins, Christopher M. Lewis and Ran Wei (2004). An Empirical Analysis 
of the Economic Impact of Federal Terrorism Reinsurance. NBER Working Paper No. w10388, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carson, Richard T., Robert C. Mitchell, W. Michael Hanemann, Raymond J. Kopp, Stanley Presser and Paul A. Ruud (2003). Contingent Valuation and Lost Passive Use: Damages from the Exxon Valdez Oil 
Spill. Environmental and Resource Economics 25(3): 257–286.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone (2001). Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market. The Center for Labor Economics Working Paper No. 33, University of California, Berkeley.


- 18 -

lower bound. In contrast, if the terrorist activities diverted investment from the Basque 
country to other Spanish regions, the magnitude of the gap is artificially increased.
However, the authors convincingly argue that the two biases are likely to be small.
An extensive VAR study of the macroeconomic effects of terrorism (Blomberg et al.
2004a; see also Blomberg et al. 2004b) uses a panel set with annual observations for 177 
countries from 1968 to 2000. It controls for the interactions between terrorism and other 
forms of internal and external conflict and is therefore able to differentiate between 
similar types of political disruptions. On average, terrorism (captured by the ITERATE 
data) is found to depress economic growth in a marked, and statistically significant, way.
However, this effect is considerably smaller and less persistent than that exerted by 
external wars and internal conflicts. Spending is diverted from investment to public 
expenditures. Interestingly enough, the negative association between terrorism and 
economic growth is small and statistically insignificant for advanced (OECD) economies,
which are most affected by terrorism. The depressing effect of terrorism on economic 
growth appears to be most significant for developing countries. Overall, the relationship 
between terrorism and economic growth can mainly be attributed to country fixed effects.
 The NSSE survey instrument, The College Student Report, asks students about their  
experiences in four areas: (1) The amount of time and effort devoted to various in class and out  
of class activities, (2) participation in enriching educational activities (e.g., study abroad,
internships), (3) gains in personal and educational development, and (4) perceptions of the  
college environment, including overall satisfaction with college and quality of academic  
advising.


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 8  
The survey relies on student self-reports. A fair amount of research (Baird, 1976; Berdie,
1971; Pace, 1985; Pike, 1995; Pohlmann, 1974) has shown that self-reports are likely to be valid  
if (1) the information requested is known to the respondents, (2) the questions are phrased clearly  
and unambiguously, (3) the questions refer to recent activities, (4) the respondents think the  
questions merit a serious and thoughtful response, and (5) answering the questions does not  
threaten, embarrass, or violate the privacy of the respondent or encourage the respondent to  
respond in socially desirable ways (Kuh et al., 2001). The NSSE survey was designed to satisfy  
all of these conditions.
 To answer the guiding research questions we draw on two overlapping samples of  
students. The first sample was composed of 98,744 undergraduates (49,706 first-year students,
49,038 seniors) from 349 four-year colleges and universities who responded to the NSSE survey  
in spring 2002. The second sample is a subset of the larger sample and is composed of 17,640  
(9,598 first year students, 8,042 seniors) undergraduate students enrolled at 68 Baccalaureate  
Colleges - Liberal Arts 1, as defined in the Carnegie classification scheme (McCormick, 2001).
Kanazawa Medical University, 1–1 Daigaku, Uchinada-machi, Kahoku-gun,
Ishikawa, 920–0293, Japan, tel. +81 (0)76 286 2211, fax +81 (0)76 286 3728,
e-mail: ymjr@kanazawa-med.ac.jp 413 
 by guest on M ay 7, 2013 
http://eurpub.oxfordjournals.org/ D 
ow nloaded from 
  



The range of salaries differed markedly in the Japanese and British cohorts. When participants are divided into three employment grades, the lowest employment grade earns about half of that of the highest grade in Japan and in Britain the corresponding proportion is about a quarter.11 
Baseline survey The health questionnaire was administered from March to May 1990 for the Japanese population. For the British population, it was administered between November 1985 and March 1988. Questions on smoking habit (current smoker or ex-smoker), drinking habit (frequency of drinking per week), physical activity and self-rated health were comparable between British and Japanese cohorts. Physical activity was assessed using questions on frequencies per week of mild, moderate and vigorous activity, and categorised into three groups; none or mild, moderate (more than 1 time /week of moderate physical activity), and vigorous (more than 1 time/week of vigorous physical activity). Self-rated health over the past 12 months was obtained from the question ‘In general would you say your health is’ with five response alternatives ranging from ‘very good’ to ‘very poor’. For these analyses the outcome was categorized as (1) good and very good, (2) average and (3) poor and very poor.
Sickness absence records Information on sickness absences of more than seven calendar days (long-term sickness absence) to the end of 1998 was available in both cohorts. For an absence of more than seven calendar days, a medical certificate was required in both cohorts. In the Japanese cohort, the long-term sickness absence records were obtained from the computerized certificates of the health and welfare department in this company. In the British cohort, computerized sickness absence records were obtained annually from the civil service pay centres.
Statistical analysis The occurrence of the first sickness absence spell affects the risk of further spells. Thus the analysis of long spells was based on the first occurrence of a long spell. Incidence rates of sickness absence were expressed per 100 person years. Age adjusted rates were calculated by the indirect method of standardization. The comparisons in sickness absence rates between countries and between employment grades were carried out separately in white-collar and blue-collar populations. Adjusted hazard ratios and their 95% confidence intervals were estimated by Cox’s proportional hazard regression model.
RESULTS Table 1 shows the total numbers of subjects and baseline characteristics in the two study cohorts by employment grade. The mean age of Japanese lower grade white-collar workers was younger than that of other groups. The Japanese participants had worse self-rated health than the British participants. In addition, the prevalence of current smoking and habitual drinking was much higher in the Japanese cohort. However, the prevalence of regular physical activity was higher in the British than the Japanese cohort. Employment grade differences in behavioural risk factors were larger in the British cohort than the Japanese cohort, particularly for smoking. Among the Japanese participants, differences between white-collar and blue-collar workers in behavioural risk factors were not marked. Age adjusted incidence rates of first long-term sickness absence were higher in lower grades than in higher grades among Japanese white collar, blue collar and British white collar workers (table 2). However, the difference between higher and lower grades was larger in the British than the Japanese population (significance of interaction term for country by grade, white collar workers, p=0.002). The sickness absence rate ratio was 2.1 for the British population and about 1.2–1.3 in the Japanese white-collar and blue-collar population. Figure 1 shows age adjusted hazard ratios by study population and employment grade (higher grade whitecollar Japanese men is the reference). Although the differences in absence rates between higher grade white-collar subjects in Britain and Japan were relatively small, the difference between lower grade white-collar subjects were large. Table 3 shows the results of Cox’s regression analysis of the effects of self-rated health and behavioural risk factors on sickness absence. Self-rated health predicted incidence of sickness absence with statistical significance in both Britain and Japan. The hazard ratios of subjects with poor health were 1.69 for the Japanese cohort and 3.15 for the British cohort. Current smoking and ex-smoking was also a predictor of sickness absence. Drinking three times per week or more and regular moderate or vigorous exercise reduced sickness absence risk among the British cohort. However, among the Japanese cohort these behaviours did not predict sickness absence. The results suggest that 
Table 1 Number of subjects and baseline characteristics 
No. of subjects 
Mean age (SD) 
Self-rated health Current smoker 
% 
Drinking ≥3/wk 
% 
Physical activity 
Population Grade Average 
% Poor 
% Moderate 
% Vigorous 
% 
Japan 
White-collar Higher 405 45.3 (4.7) 68.5 13.4 53.5 67.5 25.2 69.0 
Lower 306 39.7 (5.1) 74.8 11.8 52.0 52.9 24.4 69.0 
Blue-collar Higher 1161 43.2 (5.1) 72.4 17.2 62.5 63.1 21.7 66.3 
Lower 632 43.6 (6.1) 72.2 15.6 59.2 56.9 23.9 61.7 
Britain Higher 3569 44.7 (5.9) 15.8 3.0 10.8 38.4 49.8 21.6 
Lower 2721 43.3 (6.1) 21.0 5.1 22.8 28.2 40.9 33.0 
Table 2 Age adjusted incidence rates per 100 person years of first time long-term sickness absence by study population and employment grade 
Population Grade Person years No. of cases Age adjusted rate (95% CI) 
Japan 
White-collar Higher 2949 93 3.06 (2.44–3.68) 
Lower 2293 72 3.63 (2.79–4.46) 
Blue-collar Higher 8491 288 3.49 (3.09–3.89) 
Lower 4105 186 4.57 (3.91–5.23) 
Britain 
White-collar Higher 20707 1084 5.13 (4.82–5.43) 
Lower 13598 1408 10.6 (10.0–11.1) 
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH VOL. 14  2004  NO. 4 
414 
 by guest on M ay 7, 2013 
http://eurpub.oxfordjournals.org/ D 
ow nloaded from 
  



behavioural risk factors and self-rated health predict sickness absence more strongly in the British cohort than the Japanese cohort. Table 4 shows the hazard ratios of sickness absence by employment grade after adjusting for age alone and for age, behavioural risk factors (smoking habit, drinking habit and physical activity) and self-rated health. The age adjusted hazard ratios of sickness absence of lower grade with higher grade were significantly high in each population. The hazard ratios of sickness absence for the lower grade with higher grade in Japanese white collar, blue collar and Britain were 1.50, 1.31 and 2.04, respectively (each one statistically significant). Additional adjustment for behavioural factors and self-rated health reduced the employment grade differences by 10% for the Japanese white collar, by 2% for the Japanese blue-collar and by 20% for the British cohort.
?
?
738 International Organization 


pared with what the richest countries possess+51 As countries grow rich their dependence on natural wealth becomes minimal+ Indeed, the smallest wealth gap between rich and poor countries in per capita terms is natural wealth+ The share of the poorest countries’ per capita natural wealth in the richest countries’ total is roughly 65 percent, even though they only have 2 percent of the per capita income+ Thus, what the poor lack relative to the rich is not natural capital ~in per capita terms!, but human and manufactured capital+ 
The importance of GS stems from its ability to indicate whether changes in the total capital stock are beneficial or detrimental to future well-being+ As Dasgupta has written,
Genuine investment is the social worth of net changes in an economy’s capital assets+ It is a comprehensive notion, including as it does the social worth of net changes in manufactured and human capital, public knowledge, and natural capital+ Thus, ensuring that social well-being is sustainable involves taking care that the economy’s assets are managed well+52 
The GS rate, or genuine investment rate as Dasgupta prefers to call it, is one effort to estimate the sustainability path of nations based on how “well” they manage their total capital stock+ How “well” then is highly dependent on the environmental costs based on damage to atmosphere—by carbon dioxide ~CO2!—and depreciation of the natural resource stock ~forest, mineral, and energy stocks!+ While resource-wealthy countries, such as oil producers, would naturally have higher depletion, policies governing the decisions to spend on education and other investments in capital may more than offset the given depletion+ Such countries, however, rarely make these forms of investment, which means that their future well-being is jeopardized by an unsustainable path of resource extraction+53 
While some argue about the exact method of calculating resource depletion and some problematic assumptions surrounding the concept and its measurement,54 this study accepts the adequacy of the World Bank’s method for current purposes+ Naturally, scholars can further test the conflicting theories against better data as they become available+ The multidimensionality of the measure of sustainability that the GS rate presents, however, makes it an attractive choice for addressing the larger issue of how globalization may influence well-being of nations over time+ An additional advantage of this measure of sustainability is that it is widely available in time-series format, is consistent with most orthodox views that see economic activity requiring trade-offs, and is a measure policymakers readily understand and would be able to respond to meaningfully+55 
51+ The poorest countries are the World Bank’s 2002 list of “low income” countries and the richest are the “high income” category+ 
52+ Dasgupta 2001, 87+ 53+ See Atkinson and Hamilton 2003; and Hamilton 2001+ 54+ Neumayer 2000+ 55+ Atkinson and Hamilton 2003+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 9042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:739 
?
?
?
In 1994, a random sample of 15,579 Canadian households with at least one child aged 0 to 11 years was selected by Statistics Canada for a longitudinal study of children’s development (Human Resources Development Canada, 1996). Response was obtained for 13,439 of these selected households—an overall response rate of 86.3%.
Data collection was undertaken every 2 years through home interviews with the person most knowledgeable about the child (PMK). Data from cycle 1 (1994–1995), cycle 2 (1996–1997), cycle 3 (1998–1999), and cycle 4 (2000–2001) were available for analysis at the time of the present study. Other details about the study can be found in Statistics Canada and Human Resources Development Canada (1995).
From the 13,439 households with children under 11 years of age at cycle 1, we selected children aged between birth and 9 years at cycle 1 who were followed longitudinally and who had at least two PA assessments (n = 10,658). Only 127 children had more than two missing PA assessments and their PA scores were not 


Trajectories of Physical Aggression 75 
Table I. Characteristics of the Sample at Cycle 1 (n = 10,658 Unless Otherwise Indicated)a 
n % 
Sex of child Male 5,459 51.22 Female 5,199 48.78 
Age group of mother at birth of first child (n = 9,420) 21 years or less 2,302 24.45 Older than 21 years 7,115 75.55 
Mother graduated from high school (n = 10,621) Yes 8,353 78.65 No 2,268 21.35 
Father graduated from high school (n = 8,873) Yes 6,794 76.57 No 2,079 23.43 
Mother employed outside the home (n = 7,179) Yes 5,815 81.01 No 1,363 18.99 
Father employed outside the home (n = 8,388) Yes 7,507 89.51 No 879 10.49 
Family status at time of interview Two parents 8,194 76.88 One parent 2,464 23.12 
Number of siblings in the home None 2,226 20.88 One or more 8,432 79.12 
Family income (in 1994) Less than 25,000$ 2,412 22.63 25,000$–40,000$ 2,489 23.36 41,000$–60,000$ 3,067 28.77 More than 60,000$ 2,690 25.24 
aThe number of participants is weighted and rounded.
significantly different from those children who were included in the analyses (at cycle 1: mean PA excluded = 1.04 vs. included = 1.12; p = 0.68; at cycle 2: mean PA excluded = 0.98 vs. included = 1.02, p = 0.83). Table I presents the characteristics of the sample.
The study uses a longitudinal accelerated design. This implies that overlapping trajectories of a maximum length of 6 years were combined into summary trajectories that began at age 2 and ended at age 11 years. Specifically, we used data collected on children from 10 different age groups, or cohorts, who were followed for a shorter interval (6 years) than the age range for which data were available (ages 2 to 11: 9 years).
The design of the study has some implications for the modeling of trajectories. For example, data from cohort 3 served to estimate trajectory points at the ages of 2,
736 International Organization 


increased economic activity across the globe can magnify the effects of human activity on the ecosystem, leading to collapse+37 Pessimists also contest the notion that poverty pollutes more than wealth on grounds that the rich consume and waste more+ In other words, the luxurious “greed” of the rich cannot be compared with the survival “needs” of the poor+ These analysts suggest that increased trade will accentuate the profligacy of the already rich+ The rich will expand their consumption possibilities at the expense of the poor by displacing the environmental costs on them+38 This proposition relates to what many term the “pollution haven hypothesis,” whereby polluting industries move from more stringent regulatory environments to lax ones+ 
The debate between defenders and critics of globalization mirrors older theoretical splits in the social sciences, which pitted dependency0world systems theorists against liberals and modernization theorists concerning the fundamental nature of whether or not closer contact between rich and poor results in exploitative outcomes, such as poverty, the export of pollution, and environmental degradation+39 Dependency theorists challenge the liberal view by arguing that international interdependence is neocolonialism, a system of exploitation, which leads to distorted LDC economies, lowered levels of democracy, and the breakdown of social relations+40 They suggest that openness to the world economy leads to the “decapitalization” of poor countries, because of the intensification of inappropriate consumption, lowered domestic savings, and capital repatriation by foreign com-
panies+41 These theorists also argue that free trade results in uneven development and a divided planet within which cooperation required for environmental protection may not be forthcoming+42 Their exhortations are generally to find alternative paths to free-market capitalism+43 World-systems theory similarly views closer contact between rich and poor as a barrier against endogenously determined paths of progress+44 
We contend that the longer-term effects of market globalization and economic openness on sustainability can be judged by examining the effects of trade dependence, dependence on FDI, and the level of economic freedom on patterns of savings of physical, human, and natural capital over time+45 This study asks to what extent globalization promotes, or hinders the achievement of weak sustainability+ If globalization represents an extractive, exploitative, top-down project, as the crit-

37+ Mabey and McNally 1998+ 38+ Fernando 2003+ 39+ For a review of long-standing theoretical debates and empirical evidence in political science 
and sociology concerning the effects of MNCs on development, see de Soysa 2003+ 40+ Amin 1990+ 41+ Bornschier and Chase-Dunn 1985+ 42+ For an excellent treatment of the differing perspectives, see Gilpin 2000+ 43+ Fernando 2003+ 44+ See Bornschier and Chase-Dunn 1985; Cardoso and Faletto 1979; Galtung 1971; and Hoogvelt 
2001+ 45+ Mikesell 1992+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 7042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:737 
?
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 737 


ics claim, then its effect on the accumulation of physical, human, and natural capital stocks over time should provide some indication of the expected harm+ 
Measuring Weak Sustainability 
There are several operational definitions of sustainable development and methods for calculating measures and indexes of sustainability+46 This study’s definition is close to the sprit of the original, which is “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs+”47 In other words, the steady depletion, or degradation of physical, natural, or human capital without offsetting gains may be deemed unsustainable+ As some claim quite simply, savings of all forms of capital is the essence of sustainability+48 
Until quite recently, economists viewed the growth of gross domestic product ~GDP! as a measure of development+ GDP and the investment required for the growth of output were thought of as involving merely manufactured and, perhaps, human capital+ The degradation of natural capital in the process of economic activity was unaccounted in GDP statistics+ Green accounting processes began as an important corrective for making GDP reflect the degradation of the natural environment as a consequence of economic production+ As a result, the World Bank embarked on estimating the “Wealth of Nations” to include manufactured, human, and natural capital of countries as a first step toward monitoring the progress of nations in terms of sustainability+49 The changes in the redefined estimates of wealth, therefore, indicate the sustainability0unsustainability of a development trajectory of any given country over time+ Importantly, however, these data also show that the most important component of most nations’ capital stocks is human capital ~unfortunately, social capital is left out of the calculations because of the complex issues surrounding its measurability!+ 
Our calculations based on these data reveal that the poorest countries have much natural capital, but a relative lack of human capital+50 These data show that the poorest countries have roughly five times more natural capital in total wealth com-

46+ Neumayer 2004+ 47+ World Commission on Environment and Development 1987, 89+ 48+ Atkinson et al+ 1997+ 49+ World Bank 1997+ 50+ These data are constructed for about 100 countries for the year 1994 and represent the first 
disaggregated measure of the actual wealth of nations+ The data are values for total natural capital composed of cropland, land, pasture, timber, nontimber assets, protected areas, and all subsoil resources ~minerals!+ Human capital is computed as the value of labor based on education and health, and manufactured capital consists of man-made objects such as buildings, roads, ports etc+ The construction of the data is explained in several studies ~Hamilton and Clemens 1999; and Kunte et al+ 1998! and on the World Bank’s department of environment Web site: ^http:00 lnweb18+worldbank+org0ESSD0 envext+nsf041ByDocName0Environment&+ Accessed 10 March 2005+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 8042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:738 
?
  
Science, in particular, makes a strong demand on students’ use of language (Gee, 2004).
This use requires students t utilise oral, printed, symbolic and traditional worldviews to  
assist them to understand Western science concepts. In fact, learning is restricted if the  
students cannot situate their learning in terms of embedded experience which includes  
traditional stories and knowledge. Traditional story telling utilises gestures. Science  
teaching in Papua New Guinea by national teachers utilises a high degree of gestures.


 6  
  
Students use these gestures in developing their understanding of science (Roth, 2004).
Since traditional story telling utilises gestures, one needs to examine whether students  
retain traditional understandings of concepts that can conflict with Western science  
concepts. Furthermore, this study states that the learner’s cultural background has an  
effect in knowing and learning science as this creates a gap between western and non-

western interpretations of reality in science education.
  
Many researchers (Baker & Taylor, 1995; Boeha, 1987; Cobern, 1993; 1996; Cobern &  
Aikenhead, 1998; Jegede; 1995; 1997; Maddock, 1981; Ogbu, 1992; Ogawa, 1986;  
Okebukola & Jegede, 1990; Waldrip & Taylor, 1999a) have stated that the culture of a  
learner plays a central role in learning science. The use of prior knowledge and situated  
cognition is a basis for arguing how learning occurs and is dependent on the  
environment as a source of information. In the case of PNG students who attend science  
classes with Melanesian worldviews, the interaction between the Western mechanistic  
worldview and the Melanesian traditional knowledge may complicate their cognitive  
processes. Traditional beliefs, ideas or stories to explain natural phenomena do exist in  
every community. As evidenced by the voluminous research globally, students bring to  
science classes their ideas and beliefs about the natural world (Driver, et al., 1994) that  
often are not in conformity with the scientific notions. As other examples of research  
studies in PNG (Boeha, 1987; George, 1991; Kelontii, 1996; Maddock, 1981;  
Vlaardingerbroek, 1990) have shown prevalent traditional beliefs or ideas exist to  
explain natural phenomena.  These studies have shown that scientific explanations of  
the physical world are learned in school science chiefly for passing examinations.
However, these studies have not examined the concurrent existence of traditional  
knowledge and students’ understanding of the natural world while attending science  
classes.


 12  
In periods of major social restructuring, diverse economic, political, and socio-cultural  narratives may intersect as they seek to give meaning to current problems by  construing them in terms of past failures and future possibilities. Different social  forces in the private and public domains propose new visions, projects, programmes,  and policies and a struggle for hegemony grows. The plausibility of these narratives  and their associated strategies and projects depends on their resonance (and hence  capacity to reinterpret and mobilize) with the personal (including shared) narratives of  significant classes, strata, social categories, or groups affected by the postwar  economic and political order. Moreover, although many plausible narratives are  possible, their narrators will not be equally effective in conveying their messages and  securing support for the lessons they hope to draw. This will depend on the prevailing  ‘web of interlocution’9 and its discursive selectivities, the organization and operation  of the mass media, the role of intellectuals in public life, and the structural biases and  strategically selective operations of various public and private apparatuses of  economic, political, and ideological domination.10 Such concerns take us well beyond  a concern for narrativity and/or the constraints rooted in specific organizational or  institutional genres, of course, into the many extra-discursive conditions of narrative  appeal and of stable semiotic orders. That these institutional and meta-narratives  have powerful resonance does not mean that they should be taken at face value. All  narratives are selective, appropriate some arguments, and combine them in specific  ways. In this sense, then, one must consider what is left unstated or silent, what is  repressed or suppressed in official discourse.
The strategic-relational analysis of structure and agency in struggles over hegemony  rests on the general evolutionary distinction between variation, selection, and  retention. First, there is continuing variation in discourses as actors intentionally or  unintentionally redefine the sites, subjects, and stakes of action and articulate  innovative strategies, projects and visions. This is especially likely during crises,  which often produce profound strategic disorientation and a proliferation of alternative  discourses. Second, while most of this variation is arbitrary and short-lived, lacking  long-term consequences for overall social dynamics, some semiotic innovations are  selected. This occurs because they resonate discursively with other actors and social  forces and/or because they are reinforced through various structural mechanisms. So  


 13  
we must explore the discursive and extra-discursive mechanisms that select some  discourses for further elaboration and effective articulation with other discourses.
Discourses are most powerful where they operate across many sites and scales and  can establish and connect local hegemonies into a more encompassing hegemonic  project. These discourses will be retained (discursively reproduced, incorporated into  individual routines, and institutionally embedded) when they are able to reorganize  the balance of forces and guide supportive structural transformation. Although any  given economic or political imaginary is only ever partially realized, those that  succeed, at least in part, have their own performative, constitutive force in the  material world – especially when they correspond to (or successfully shape)  underlying material transformations, can mobilize different elites to form a new power  bloc, can organize popular support, disorganize opposition, and marginalize  resistance. They will be most successful when they establish a new spatiotemporal  fix that can displace and/or defer capital’s inherent contradictions and crisis-tendencies in the international political economy. In short, discourses and their  related discursive chains can generate variation, have selective effects – reinforcing  some discourses, filtering others out, and contribute to the differential retention  and/or institutionalization of social relation through the recursive selection of certain  genres, performances, and strategies (Jessop 2004).
social presence is activated as soon as a user believes that an entity in the  
environment displays some minimal intelligence in its reactions to the environment  
and the user. This definition seeks to accommodate human-to-human social  
interaction as well the social interactions that have been documented with common  
computer interfaces (Reeves and Nass, 1996). Cognitive states associated with  
social presence may inevitably involve some form of mental model of the other. In  
the context of social presence theory, Biocca and his colleagues (Biocca, 1997;  
Nowak, 2000; Biocca and Nowak, 2001; Nowak and Biocca, 2001) have  
emphasized that a substantial mental model of the other is activated immediately  
upon detection of behavior that suggests the presence of another intelligence. Like  


    
17  
the primitive activation of approach and avoidance reactions, some modeling is  
necessary to reduce the uncertainty and to model the intentions of the other  
towards the environment and the user.
Salience of the interpersonal relationship. Short, Williams and Christie (Short,
Williams et al., 1976) suggest some level of psychological involvement beyond  
attention by including in their definition of social presence: “The degree of salience  
of the other person in the interaction and the consequent salience of the  
interpersonal relationships…it is a subjective quality of the communications  
medium…”(p. 65). Salience of the other was both an “attitudinal dimension of the  
user, a ‘mental set’ towards the medium” (p.65), but also “it is phenomenological  
variable…affected not simply by the transmission of single nonverbal cues, but by  
whole constellations of cues which affect the ‘apparent distance’ of the other.”  
(P.157).
Intimacy and immediacy. Rice emphasizes this aspect of psychological  
involvement by echoing Short, Williams and Christie’s classic social psychological  
claim that social presence “is fundamentally related to two social psychology  
concepts; intimacy and immediacy” (Rice, 1993), (p. 72). This work emphasized  
more social theories of social presence focused on “media appropriateness” (Rice,
1993).  These concepts are applied to media from the social psychological work of  
Argyle (Argyle, 1965; Argyle, 1969; Argyle, 1975; Argyle and Cook, 1976) and  
Mehrabian (Mehrabian, 1972) on the role of nonverbal communication in  
interpersonal interaction.


    
18  
In a similar fashion, Palmer links presence to aspects of psychological  
involvement with the other:  
Although these terms (immediacy, intimacy and involvement) are typically  
used to describe behaviors, it is not difficult to imagine that they also  
describe a cognitive state in which individuals feel more or less directly  
‘present’ in the interaction and in the process by which relationships are being  
created (Palmer, 1995, p.284).
(4) t-values in brackets. (5) Variables for working hours, household income, age, gender, citizenship, marital status, children, education, employment status, area of living and household size,
and dummy variables for highest income category and for the different countries are not shown. Dummy variables for missing observations for income, household size, working hours, gender, marital status, children, education, employment status, and citizenship are neither shown. Data source: European Social Survey, World Development Indicators.
B .S 
. F 
rey et 
al. / 
Journal of 
E conom 
ic P 
sychology 28 
(2007) 283–313 
299 


underlying the revealed behavior approach of human well-being (for a survey see Wilson & Gilbert, 2003). People systematically underestimate that their preferences change due to processes of adaptation (Loewenstein et al., 2003). Moreover, misprediction of utility is asymmetric, whereby the positive affects of a high material standard of living are overestimated and the positive affects of activities with strong intrinsic attributes, like socializing, are underestimated (Frey & Stutzer, 2004). These aspects of mispredicting utility are directly relevant for TV consumption choice. People are expected to watch too much TV if they underestimate the future costs of TV viewing, due to neglecting social contacts and rising material aspirations. We are aware that it is not possible to discriminate between limited self-control with perfect and with imperfect projection of future beliefs in the current empirical framework. However, we are convinced that it is important to take mispre-diction of utility into account when refining the analysis of TV consumption.
Previous research has looked at the differences in beliefs and preferences between heavy and light TV viewers, induced by the fact that life portrayed on TV differs systematically from real life. Television programs contain much more violence and chaotic relationships and show many more aﬄuent people and more luxury than exist in real life (e.g. Lichter, Lichter, & Rothman, 1994). People who spend a lot of time watching TV therefore tend to overestimate crime rates, to show more anxiety (Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, Signorielli, & Shanahan, 2002) and less trust in others (e.g. Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, & Signorielli, 1980; Signorielli, Gerbner, & Morgan, 1995). They overestimate the aﬄuence of others (O’Guinn & Shrum, 1997), report higher material aspirations (e.g. Bruni & Stanca, 2006; Richins, 1987; Sirgy et al., 1998; Shrum, Burroughs, & Rindfleisch, 2005) and rate their own relative income lower which is related to lower subjective well-being (Layard, 2005).
We perform a path analysis to shed some light on the long-term consequences of TV consumption and how they correlate with subjective well-being. An analysis is made as to whether people who watch more TV report lower financial satisfaction (keeping household income constant) and tend to believe that it is important to be rich, whether they feel less safe or trust others less and whether they think that they participate less in social activities. Financial satisfaction is captured with the question ‘‘[. . .] how do you feel about your household’s income nowadays?’’ Answers are given on a scale from 1 ‘‘living comfortably on present income’’ to 4 ‘‘very difficult on present income’’, which is reverted for the empirical analysis. Respondents indicate on a scale from 1 to 6 how important it is for them to be rich. They are asked how safe they feel walking in the local area after dark. Answers range from 1 ‘‘very safe’’ to 4 ‘‘very unsafe’’, and this scale is reverted again in order to let higher values reflect a better feeling of safety. As a proxy for trust serves the answers to the question ‘‘Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?’’ Answers range on an 11-point scale from 0 ‘‘you can’t be too careful’’ to 10 ‘‘most people can be trusted’’. Finally, respondents are asked: ‘‘Compared to other people of your age, how often would you say that you take part in social activities?’’ Answers range from 1 ‘‘much less than most’’ to 5 ‘‘much more than most’’.
5 Canada Research Chair, University of Montre´al, Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada.
6 Address all correspondence to Sylvana M. Coˆte´, University of Montre´al, 90 ave. Vincent-d’Indy, C.P. 6128 Succursale centre-ville, Montre´al, H3C 3J7, Canada; e-mail: sylvana.cote@umontreal.ca.
INTRODUCTION 
Although aggressive behaviors may be adaptive and necessary for survival (Archer & Coˆte´, 2005; Cairns, 1979; Darwin, 1872; Lorenz, 1966), atypically high levels of aggression, especially physical aggression, are generally associated with a wide range of social problems (Krug, Dahlberg, Mercy, Zwi, & Lozano, 2002; McCord, Spatz Widom, & Crowell, 2001). Studies have shown that such problematic levels of aggression in adolescence or adulthood can be identified in the preschool years (Keenan & Wakschlag, 2000) and can be traced to events occurring 
71 0091-0627/06/0200-0071/0 C© 2006 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.


72 Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc, Nagin, and Tremblay 
early in life (Arseneault et al., 2003; Caspi et al., 2002; Moffitt, Caspi, Rutter, & Silva, 2001; Nagin & Tremblay, 2001). However, no studies have mapped the development of PA between toddlerhood and adolescence or adulthood. Therefore, the extent to which aggression in early childhood represents a risk for continued aggression is unclear.
Research on the development of aggression needs to reconcile three apparently contradictory findings: (1) most preschoolers use physical aggression; (2) the earlier the onset of problem behaviors, the higher the risk for continued aggression and violence, yet, (3) only a small proportion of individuals are persistently physically aggressive (Brame, Nagin, & Tremblay, 2001; Broidy et al., 2003). One challenge is to distinguish between the normative patterns of aggressive behaviors and the more atypical pattern that may represent a risk for future difficulties. The distinction is important for the identification of children at risk and for the implementation of preventive interventions.
The present study maps the developmental course of physical aggression (PA) from toddlerhood to preadolescence with the aim of: (1) distinguishing between typical (or normative) and atypically high developmental trajectories of PA and (2) identifying risk factors associated with high PA trajectories. The term physical aggression is used to refer to physical acts that are directed at another person and that can potentially be harmful (e.g., kicking, pushing, hitting; Cairns, Cairns, Neckerman, Ferguson, & Gariepy, 1989; Straus & Gelles, 1990; Tremblay, 2000).
hotels could not easily compensate these losses by cutting prices.
Two recent studies look at the effect of an intensification of extraordinary terrorist events 
on US tourist receipts and US airline demand. Sloboda (2003) uses ARMAX 
methodology to analyze annual time series of the number of terror attacks on US interests 
and US tourism receipts for the period 1988 to 2001, and estimates the effect of the Gulf 
War in 1991 and the accompanying increase in anti-American attacks on tourism 
revenues. In 1991, the number of incidents on US interests roughly doubled; this shock 
had a temporary negative impact on the tourism industry, which lasted until 2000.
Aggregating the annual impacts of this initial shock (i.e. the impact of the increase in 
terrorism in later years is not included), total losses in revenue are approximately $57 
billion (1996 present value discounted at 5%). Ito and Lee (2004) assess the impact of the 
September 11 attacks and the imposition of stringent new security requirements on 
domestic airline demand in the USA. The authors estimate a reduced form model of 
demand for air services with monthly time-series data since 1986 and model the post-

September 11 period as an attenuating shock process, that has both a transitory and an 
ongoing component. After controlling for cyclical, seasonal and other unique events 
impacting the industry, the initial demand shock is estimated to be more than 30% 
measured in revenue passenger miles (RPMs), and 7.3% measured in yields. The decline 
in yield is smaller because a large number of airline tickets are purchased well in 
advance. In addition to the transitory shock, there is an ongoing downward shift in the 
demand of 7.4% measured in RPMs and of 10% measured in yields. The decline in 
demand is especially pronounced in the short-haul market, where more substitution 
possibilities are available. On the basis of a counterfactual demand prediction the authors 
conclude that the terror attacks and security measures account for roughly 94% of the 
decline in RPMs from the historical peak.
Estimated impacts of terrorism on tourism vary considerably, because the structure of the 
tourism industry and terror campaigns differ, not only across countries, but also over 
time. This hampers comparisons between studies. Instead, it emphasizes the importance 


- 9 -

of differentiating between different types of attacks, e.g. the location of an attack (i.e.
whether it takes place in an urban or a rural area) and the number of casualties (see e.g.
Drakos and Kutan 2003).
4.1 Traditional methods 
Two avenues have been pursued to infer and elicit individuals’ preferences for public 
goods and externalities: stated preference methods on the one hand and revealed 
preference methods on the other hand. The most prominent exponent of the former is the 
contingent valuation method and of the latter the hedonic market approach.
1. Contingent valuation surveys enable researchers to assess the effect of a reduction of 
terrorism on utility, including non-use values.14 Terrorism is directly assessed, using 
survey questions on people’s willingness to pay, for example, for a bisection of the 
number of terrorist incidents in a region. While this is an appealingly easy framework,
there are a number of difficulties with this approach. The survey respondents find 
                                                   14 See Carson et al. (2003) for an elaborate and state-of-the-art contingent valuation study in the environmental realm. The credibility and validity of the results based on the contingent valuation method are the subject of a heated controversy in economic literature, as a symposium in the Journal of Economic Perspectives (Diamond and Hausman 1994; Hanemann 1994; Portney 1994) demonstrates.


- 20 -

themselves in an unfamiliar situation and may be induced to give strategic responses.
Important design issues to address these problems are the presentation of adequate 
information, a credible (hypothetical) payment mechanism and the use of the incentive-

compatible referendum format (Portney 1994). In order to avoid symbolic valuation, a 
survey must also contain a detailed description of a hypothetical policy program, which 
the respondents believe to be capable of providing the public good in question, i.e. the 
reduction in terrorist incidents. In light of the failure of most traditional anti-terrorism 
policies, this is likely to be a difficult task.
A basic problem of applying contingent valuation to terrorism is that it is not obvious 
what preferences should enter. Two aspects are of particular importance. First,
Data Analysis   
The dependent variables were measures of student engagement, perceptions of the  
campus environment including satisfaction, and selected self-reported outcomes of college  
(Appendix A). Student engagement was measured using four scales: (1) level of academic  
challenge, (2) classroom activities that represent higher order thinking (a subset of items that  
contribute to the academic challenge measure), (3) active and collaborative learning, and (4)  
diversity-related activities. The supportive campus environment measures included four  
measures: a supportive campus environment scale, two subscales (interpersonal support and  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 9  
support for learning) of supportive campus environment, and an overall satisfaction with college  
scale. Students’ gains in learning and intellectual development were represented by two scales:  
gains in general education and gains in personal and social development. In addition, three  
individual measures were used to represent gains in social awareness: gains in understanding  
self, gains in desire to contribute to community, and gains in understanding others. The items  
that make up the gains scales are student self reports about the extent to which their college  
experience has contributed to their growth in these areas.
The data were analyzed in three stages using hierarchical linear modeling (HLM).
Because of the nested nature of the data and the intent to estimate institutional effects  
(Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002), we used hierarchical linear modeling (HLM). When conducting  
research on organizational effects, researchers are faced with a decision about unit of analysis.
Should they build regression models by aggregating to the institution level, or should they attach  
institution-level characteristics to individuals? If researchers build models at the institution level,
they are prone to “ecologically fallacy”, whereby individual differences mask are masked (King,
1999; Kreft & deLeeuw, 1998). For example, an analysis based on colleges might reveal that  
students at smaller colleges are more engaged in effective educational practices than students at  
large colleges, while an analysis of small colleges might reveal that many students at large  
colleges are as engaged or more engaged than small college students.


- 14 -

An event which has been carefully analyzed is the cease-fire the Basque ETA declared 
between 1998 and 1999 (Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003). This can be taken to be a natural 
experiment to estimate the cost of the terrorist conflict in terms of its effect on the stock 
value of a sample of Basque and non-Basque firms. If the terrorist conflict was perceived 
to have a negative effect on the Basque economy, stocks of firms with a significant part 
of their business activity in the Basque country should exhibit a positive relative 
performance when the truce began, and a negative relative performance when the truce 
ended. Basque stocks did indeed outperform non-Basque stocks as the truce became 
credible. The compounded abnormal returns for the 22 trading sessions of the good news 
period were 10.14% for the Basque portfolio relative to the non-Basque portfolio. At the 
end of the cease-fire, Basque stocks showed a negative performance relative to non-

Basque stocks (with a relative loss over 66 trading sessions of 11.21%).
In a broad event study for 14 terrorist/military attacks, returns on the US capital market 
are analyzed (Chen and Siems 2004). Empirically, deviations of the Dow Jones Industrial 
stock index returns from past average returns (30 to 11 trading days before the event) are 
studied for different time frames. Military attacks in the past, like the invasion of France 
(May 12, 1940), or the one in North Korea (June 25, 1950), led to substantial negative 
cumulative abnormal returns when measured over 11 trading days. In contrast, there are 
no abnormal returns even on the actual day of the event of terrorist bombing attacks on 
Pan Am (December 21, 1988), the World Trade Center (February 26, 1993), Oklahoma 
City (April 19, 1995) or the US Embassy in Kenya (August 7, 1998). The single recent 
terrorist event, that even after six trading days showed negative cumulative abnormal 
returns, was September 11, 2001.
It is, however, difficult to relate the size and duration of abnormal returns to fundamental 
economic costs. Stock market fluctuations are likely to be larger than the underlying 
changes in fundamental values, because investors also buy and sell based on expectations 
about others’ behavior (Shiller 2003). This may explain why, after months of experience 
with the Israeli Palestinian conflict, the stock market in Israel still reacts with a similar 
magnitude to suicide bombings (Eldor and Melnick 2004), although one might think that 
underlying fundamental expectations do not systematically change with each new 
incident. Overall, the Israeli Palestinian conflict reduced the stock market capitalization 


- 15 -

substantially. Whilst up until the intensification of the conflict on September 27, 2000,
S&P 500 and the Israeli stock market developed in a very similar way, after this date the 
latter’s performance dropped considerably. Compared to a simulation without terrorism,
the index was 30% lower in June 30, 2003 (Eldor and Melnick 2004).
Some multiplier of terrorist attacks on firm values lies in the capital market itself. As far 
as events affect the technological functioning of capital markets, for example, by 
interrupted interbank payments, liquidity shortages can lead to reduced system stability,
KeyWords. Utilization, access, Soviet Union, inequalities, out-of-pocket payments 
A decade after the transition from communism, health systems in the countries that emerged from the Soviet Union have moved, at different speeds, away from the Soviet model of health care. The Soviet system sought to achieve universal, free access to basic health services, centrally planned according to strict norms with the goal of delivering services of uniform quality in all parts of the Soviet Union. Although it made considerable progress toward this goal, in reality, it was never fully achieved. Thus, in 1987, there were more than twice as many physicians per thousand population (5.7 versus 2.7) in Georgia than in Tajikistan, and infant mortality varied five-fold among the 15 republics,
We are grateful to all members of the LLH Study teams who participated in the coordination and organization of data collection for this working paper. The LLHProject is funded by the European Community under the FP5 horizontal programme ‘‘Confirming the International Role of Community Research’’ (INCO2-Copernicus; Contract No: ICA2-2000–10031, Project No: ICA2-1999–10074). However, the European Community cannot accept any responsibility for any information provided or views expressed. Dina Balabanova and Martin McKee are members of the U.K. Department for International Development’s (DFID) Health Systems Development Programme, within the framework of which these particular analyses were undertaken. TheDFID supports policies, programs, and projects to promote international development. The DFID provided funds for this study as part of that objective but the views and opinions expressed are those of the authors alone.
Address correspondence to Dina Balabanova, London School of Hygiene and TropicalMedicine, Keppel St., London WC1E 7HT, U.K. Martin McKee and Joceline Pomerleau are also with the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Richard Rose is with the Centre for the Study of Public Policy, University of Strathclyde, Livingstone,Glasgow, U.K. Christian Haerpfer is with the Institute for Advanced Studies, Vienna, Austria.
1928 HSR: Health Services Research 39:6, Part II (December 2004) 


from 11.3 per 1,000 births in Latvia to 56.4 in Turkmenistan (Rowland and Telyukov 1991). In addition, although the Soviet health care system was often seen asmonolithic, therewere several parallel systems run by otherministries, for example, for the defense forces and KGB, although they were relatively unimportant numerically, with the Ministry of Health in Moscow responsible for 96 percent of hospital beds and 94 percent of ambulatory care in the U.S.S.R. in the late 1980s (Peoples Economy of the U.S.S.R. in 1989 1999). However there was some diversity among facilities under the control of the Ministry of Health, with those attached to major enterprises, such as factories, often receiving considerable subsidies from their associated enterprise while facilities for the Communist Party elite in Moscow, also under the control of a section of the Ministry of Health, received substantially higher levels of funding. Finally, in part reflecting difficulties in communications and supply, individual accounts by health professionals suggest that facilities were often less well developed in isolated rural areas, especially in the far north where populations were nomadic, although despite the enormous problems involved, some basic services were always maintained in these areas. Yet, in most respects, a physician moving from one part of the U.S.S.R. to another would be familiar with the overall operation of the system.
The events that accompanied the break up of the Soviet Union made it inevitable that this system would change, for two reasons. First, in many countries there was a widespread rejection of the Soviet model, with its symbolic association with the communist system. Second, in many countries, the economic collapse caused by the disruption of production and trading relationships and, in some cases, civil disorder, exacerbated by a widespread break down in the power of the state, meant that government revenues were no longer able to sustain the inherited system (Shishkin 1999).
Table IV. Child and Family Characteristics by Physical Aggression Trajectory Group 
Group 1: Low (n = 3,315) 
% 
Group 2: Desister (n = 5,563) 
% 
Group 3: High stable (n = 1,769) 
% 
Boys 43.86 52.25 61.75 Family characteristics 
Low income 22.94 24.29 32.66 Early motherhooda 21.97 24.69 28.17 Low maternal educationb 18.84 21.09 44.81 Separated family 21.21 22.71 17.44 
Family processes Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Positive interaction 14.17 1.89 13.82 2.47 13.49 1.4 Hostile ineffective parenting 7.74 1.99 9.46 2.88 11.34 1.74 Consistent parenting 15.15 1.97 14.68 2.67 14.31 1.47 Family functioning 7.45 2.92 8.15 3.77 8.86 2.14 
a21 years old or less at the birth of the first child. bMother did not graduate from high school.


Trajectories of Physical Aggression 81 
Table V. Predictors of High Physical Aggression Trajectory: Multivariate Logit Model 
Model 1 Model 2 
Estimate (SD) OR 95% CIa Estimate (SD) OR 95% CIa 
Boys 0.51 (0.06) 1.67∗∗ 1.5–1.87 0.44 (0.07) 1.56∗∗ 1.37–1.77 Family characteristics 
Low income 0.37 (0.07) 1.45∗∗ 1.27–1.67 0.48 (0.08) 1.61∗∗ 1.36–1.90 Early childbearing 0.05 (0.07) 1.05 0.92–1.20 0.01 (0.08) 1.01 0.86–1.18 Low maternal education 0.19 (0.07) 1.20∗ 1.05–1.38 0.16 (0.08) 1.18∗ 1.00–1.38 Separated family −0.04 (0.10) 0.96 0.79–1.17 −0.09 (0.11) 0.91 0.73–1.15 
Family processes Positive interaction — — — −0.01 (0.01) 0.99 0.97–1.01 Hostile ineffective parenting — — — 0.15 (0.01) 1.16∗∗ 1.14–1.18 Consistent parenting — — — 0.02 (0.01) 1.02 1.00–1.04 Family functioning — — — 0.01 (0.01) 1.01 0.99–1.03 
Note. n = 9635 in model 1; n = 7276 in model 2. aCI indicates confidence interval. ∗p < 0.05.∗∗p < 0.001.
This difference may be explained by the criteria used for model selection. While the two studies relied on the BIC for model selection, we also considered entropy, an index reflecting the degree to which the separation of the groups was adequate. Relying on both criteria, we selected the three-group model as the one best fitting the data. The moderate-desister group in our study appears to comprise two desister groups in the NICHD ECCRN results (the low and moderate decline groups). Similarly, the high group identified in the present sample appears to include the two highest trajectory groups in the NICHD ECCRN sample (the moderate and high groups).
Second, we identified a group of children representing 16.6% of the sample with high and stable levels of PA as compared to their peers. This developmental pattern was atypical in the sense that it was distinct from the general declining and lower levels of PA exhibited by the rest of the sample. Because most children reduced their use of PA and children in the high group did not, the magnitude of the difference between the former and the latter grew larger over the course of childhood. In preadolescence (age 11 years) children in the high PA group exhibited notably higher levels of PA as compared to their peers. For each age cohort the most physically aggressive children at cycle 1 tended to remain the most aggressive in the following three cycles. These findings are also in line with the NICHD-ECCRN (2004) results indicating that a proportion of children exhibit higher levels of PA during toddlerhood remain on relatively high trajectories throughout childhood. These two studies, in Canada and the US, replicate earlier analyses of PA trajectories during the elementary school years and high school in Canada, New Zealand and the US (Brame et al., 2001; Broidy 
et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999), but show that the same phenomenon applies to the preschool years. Thus, toddlers who use PA more frequently are at relatively high risk of remaining on a high-level trajectory throughout the school years. This finding is in keeping with the severity hypothesis, postulating that the more extreme the antisocial behavior, the more stable it should be over time (Loeber, 1982). Thus, the trajectories identified in the school years (e.g., Brame et al., 2001; Broidy et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999) appear to have their roots in the preschool years. Since assessments of PA began at 2 years, we were not able to detect its prior development. However, an observational study in day care centers (Restoin et al., 1985) and a study based on mother reports (Tremblay, 2004; Tremblay et al., 2004) both indicated a rapid increase in use of PA between the first and the third year after birth.

1 Paul Diehl, ed., Toward a Scientific Understanding of War: Studies in Honor of J. David Singer.  (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, forthcoming 2003) 
A Neural Network Analysis of Militarized Disputes, 1885-1992: Temporal Stability and  
Causal Complexity1 
Monica Lagazio, University of Nottingham 
Bruce Russett, Yale University 
Great progress has been made in predicting and explaining interstate conflict.  Improved 
data, theory, and methods all deserve credit.  Yet much remains to be done.  First, whereas many 
variables (e.g., geographical proximity, relative power, alliances, political regime type, economic 
interdependence) have important effects, even the most successful multivariate analyses leave 
much of the variance in conflict behavior unaccounted for, due to inadequate data, specification,
or theory, or simply random variation.  Consequently, questions arise about the predictive power 
of such analyses.  Can we identify, with enough accuracy for policy purposes, those relationships 
very likely or very unlikely to experience militarized disputes?  Can we reduce the number of 
false negatives and false positives?  Second, interstate conflicts are complex phenomena often 
displaying non-linear and non-monotonic patterns of interaction.  Those complexities are hard to 
model.  Finally are questions about whether causal or predictive relationships are stable across 
time and space.  One such question is whether democracy reduced the risk of interstate conflict 
throughout the twentieth century (Thompson and Tucker 1997, Maoz 1998, Russett and Oneal 
2001) or its effect was limited to the cold war era (Gowa 1999) due to particular conditions like 
ideological rivalry, bipolarity, or nuclear weapons.  Some early COW analyses (e.g., Singer and 
Small 1968) also emphasized nineteenth and twentieth century systemic differences.


2 Recent innovations have employed neural network analysis, a mathematical technique 
especially suitable to the interactive, non-linear, and contingent relations across the variables that 
may trigger militarized interstate disputes (Schrodt 1991, Beck, King, and Zeng, 2000).  As a 
descriptively predictive rather than overtly theoretical tool, neural network analysis does not 
require rigid a priori assumptions on the mathematical nature of such complex relationships as 
do commonly used multivariate statistical techniques (Garson 1991, Zeng 1999).  Moreover, it 
provides a clear answer to questions about predictive accuracy, with measures of the percentage 
of correct predictions both for dyads which actually experienced disputes and those which did 
not.  And it readily lends itself to analyses whereby one can inductively establish a pattern of 
regularities in a data set for one time period (e.g. the cold war era) and then measure how 
accurately that empirically-derived pattern of regularities postdicts to disputes, and their 
correlates or causes, in a data set for another period (e.g., the decades preceding the cold war).
To assess the possibility of uncovering durable conflict dynamics with a complex model 
we develop and test a neural network model of cold war interstate conflicts, and then test its 
performance on data covering more than a century, 1885-1992.  Since predictive accuracy is a 
major criterion by which models are assessed, our exercise can reveal the extent to which the 
cold war causal structure is representative of earlier historical contexts.  Thus the first of our 
three goals for adding to existing neural network analyses of international conflict is to discover 
whether the process at work in determining interstate conflicts during the cold war was a 
consequence of specific systemic conditions, such as East–West confrontation or United States 
hegemony, or whether some complex regularities at the dyadic level were characterizing conflict 
outcomes.  We find, rather, that much the same regularities in the pre-cold war era.  Using many 
datasets originating in the COW project, we can correctly predict 82 percent of militarized 


3 disputes and 72 percent of non-disputes in the cold war era and nearly 65 percent of disputes and 
non-disputes in the pre-cold war decades, with economic interdependence, democracy, and 
international organizations providing strong input to the predictions in both periods.
“Measuring What Matters: Crime, Disorder, and Fear,” by Wesley G. Skogan, in Measuring What Matters, ed. Langworthy: 37–53.
“Measuring What Matters: A New Way of Thinking About Crime and Public Order,” by George Kelling, in Measuring What Matters, ed. Langworthy: 27–35.
Public Involvement: Community Policing in Chicago, by Wesley G. Skogan et al. (Research Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, September 2000, NCJ 179557).
Crime, Disorder, and Public Safety: Selected NIJ Publications 
5 
R  e  s  e  a  r  c  h    i  n    B  r  i  e  f   
The main exception was the link between disorder and robbery. Of all five measures of crime—residents’ reports of violent victimization and burglary or theft and police counts of robbery, burglary, and homicide— a direct association with disorder was found only for robbery. Evidently, robbers respond to visual cues of social and physical disorder in a neighborhood. These cues may entice them to act, and this in turn undermines collective efficacy, producing a cycle  of yet more disorder and ultimately more robberies.
Implications for crime control 
Although a basic tenet of the broken windows thesis was not sustained by the study, the findings do not signify that disorder is irrelevant to understanding crime. Signs of physical and social disorder are highly visible cues to which neighborhood residents respond, and they potentially influence migration, investment, and the overall viability of a neighborhood.
In particular, disorder may operate in a cascading fashion by motivating residents to move out of their neighborhood, thereby increasing residential instability. And because people move only if they have the financial means to do so, outmigration would increase the concentration of poverty among those left behind. Since residential instability and concentrated poverty are associated with lower collective efficacy and higher crime and disorder, over the course of time this process would lead to more crime and disorder.
Short, Williams, and Christie appear to believe that they are measuring a relatively  
stable “‘mental set’ towards the medium” (p. 65).  The equivalent approach for a  
presence measure would be to ask: “How realistic is this medium?” as opposed to,
“How realistic was the experience?” We will return to this important distinction in  
the section on limitations.
Involvement, Immediacy, and Intimacy  
Short, Williams, and Christie built their theory on the contemporary social  
psychological theories of interpersonal communication. This literature identified key  


    
21  
properties of interpersonal communication labeled as involvement, intimacy (Argyle,
1965), and immediacy (Weiner and Mehrabian, 1968). These were the qualities of  
social interaction that media high in social presence could evoke during a mediated  
social interaction. While they referred to these constructs, Short Williams and  
Christie did not claim to explicitly measure them. Measures of the constructs of  
involvement, intimacy, and immediacy have been used in interpersonal and  
nonverbal communication literature to define and assess the maintenance of  
interpersonal relationships (e.g. Burgoon, 1988). In the typical study, two or more  
strangers meet in a room to discuss a topic or complete a task while some aspect  
of the interaction is manipulated. Respondents use semantic differential or Likert-

format scale items to judge statements about their partner in an interaction.
If one considers all social presence to be variable whether mediated or not,
then measures from face-to-face communication could be useable for mediated  
communication. Making this assumption Nowak (2000) adapted the Burgoon and  
Hale (1988) measure explicitly for use in mediated communication in virtual  
environments. Gunawardena and Zittle (1997) measure intimacy by blending the  
kinds of semantic differential scales used by Short et al., but structuring them to  
focus on the intimacy construct. Some of these measures reflect their origin in  
face-to-face interpersonal communication: in some cases, the language of items  
assumes a vocal interaction and emphasizes judgments of the other.
Table 4 presents the ordinary least square estimates11 of the partial correlations between TV viewing and the different measures capturing people’s beliefs and preferences.
11 In view of the categorical nature of the dependent variables, ordered probit estimates would be more accurate. However, the results of such estimates differ very little from the OLS estimates. As the latter are easier to interpret, they are presented here. The ordered probit estimates can be obtained from the authors on request.
300 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


Table 4 Television consumption and people’s beliefs and preferences 
Dependent variable (I) Financial satisfaction 
(II) Importance to be rich 
(III) Feeling of safety 
(IV) Trust in people 
(V) Perceived social activities 
No TV at all #0.050* 0.022 0.012 #0.081 #0.145** (#2.18) (0.48) (0.46) (#1.03) (#4.58) 
Less than 0.5 h TV Reference group 0.5–1.5 h TV 0.005 0.092* #0.060** #0.040 #0.016 
(0.34) (3.10) (#3.65) (#0.79) (#0.74) More than 1.5–2.5 h TV 0.004 0.163** #0.061** #0.044 #0.010 
(0.27) (5.44) (#3.69) (#0.84) (#0.49) More than 2.5 h TV #0.037* 0.218** #0.092** #0.164** #0.106** 
(#2.35) (7.16) (#5.49) (#3.11) (#4.93) Socio-demographic 
characteristics Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Country-fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Observations 41,520 37,360 41,644 41,865 41,247 R2 0.36 0.12 0.20 0.17 0.07 
Notes: (1) Dependent variables: Financial satisfaction on scale from 0 to 3, importance to be rich on scale from 0 to 5, feeling of safety on scale from 0 to 3, trust in people on scale from 0 to 10, perceived relative frequency of social activities on scale from 0 to 4. (2) Ordinary least squares estimations. (3) **Significant on 99% level, *significant on 95% level, (*) significant on 90% level.
(4) t-values in brackets. (5) Variables for working hours, household income, age, gender, citizenship, marital status, children, education, employment status, area of living and household size,
and dummy variables for highest income category and for the different countries are not shown. Dummy variables for missing observations for income, household size, working hours, gender, marital status, children, education, employment status, and citizenship are neither shown. Data source: European Social Survey, World Development Indicators.
B .S 
. F 
rey et 
al. / 
Journal of 
E conom 
ic P 
sychology 28 
(2007) 283–313 
301 


In all five estimations, the coefficients for watching more than 2.5 h TV show the expected signs and are statistically significant at the 95–99% level: Heavy TV viewers report lower satisfaction with their financial situation, place more importance on aﬄuence, feel less safe, trust other people less and think that they are involved in less social activities than their peers. The effects are sizeable and (in relation to the respective scale of the dependent variable) are the largest for ‘importance of being rich’ and ‘feeling of safety’. For intermediate levels of TV consumption, there are also positive effects on the importance of being rich and negative effects on the feeling of safety (statistically significant at the 95–99% level). There is no statistically significant correlation between intermediate levels of TV consumption and financial satisfaction, trust and perceived relative frequency of social activities.12 
In the next step, an analysis is made of whether those preferences and beliefs influenced by TV affect reported life satisfaction. Accordingly, the five variables are included in the life satisfaction-television equation. For simplicity, least squares estimates are presented, and the intervening variables are included cardinally.13 Column I presents the results without including any intervening variable (corresponding to the results in Table 1). In column II, all five intervening variables are included in the regression. The partial correlations with life satisfaction of all of the variables have the expected signs and are statistically significant at the 99% level. The coefficient for people watching more then 2.5 h TV is halved and drops from #0.18 in the regression without any intervening variable in column I to #0.09. The coefficients for TV viewing between 0.5 and 2.5 h are also decreased. Including the intervening variables one by one into the regression equations (columns III to VII in Table 5) shows that the indirect effect of TV consumption on life satisfaction is smallest for ‘importance of being rich’ and is of about the same size for the other four variables (looking at the differences in coefficients for more than 2.5 h TV viewing). According to the Sobel’s test,14 differences in coefficients between regression with and without intervening variables are all statistically significant for the category of heavy TV consumption.
Of course, contemporary societies are complex entities in which many social relations take place over a distance, rather than through face-to-face interaction, and are often conducted in the currency of abstract, coded information, rather than through visual channels of appearance, speech and gesture (Giddens 1990). Nevertheless, rather than this disembedding and time-space distanciation of social relations having reduced the role played by visuality in contemporary forms of citizenship, we hypothesized that this role had simply been transformed. Furthermore, we wanted to explore whether the transformation of such visual channels through their shift to the media and to communications technology was actually helping to create the cultural conditions for cosmopolitan citizenship (Bauman 1993; Beck 2000; Tomlinson 1999). It was with such questions in mind that we and others at Lancaster carried out our research on the production, circulation and reception of global imagery and narratives in the media.8 
Using interviews with communications professionals, a survey of broadcast television output, and a series of focus group discussions, we sought to understand the dynamics through which global imagery, narratives and appeals are produced and circulated within the mass media, and the effects that these might be having upon people’s senses of themselves as bearers of cosmopolitan rights and responsibilities. In relation to the emergence in earlier centuries of national citizenship, Benedict Anderson had brought attention to the crucial ‘cultural work’ that needed to be done before people could begin to feel themselves to be part of such large political and civic units. Printed books and newspapers, radio and public service television, flags and civic rituals all played important roles in this process – not just by making possible the circulation of information about the life of the nation, but also by providing ways in which people could feel part of an ‘imagined community’ made up of people they would never meet in places they would never visit (Anderson 1983). We argued that the formation of anything like global citizenship in the twentyfirst century would require a comparable amount of cultural work, and suggested that global imagery in the media might be functioning as a vehicle for such work.
There is certainly evidence that the media can play a crucial role in creating the conditions for cosmopolitan citizenship, through both the thematization of difference and the representation of empirical commonalities and universals. Even in Mainland China the massive growth of diverse media is apparently generating a re-cosmopolitanization (Yang 1997; see Ong and Nonini 1997). The Commission on Global Governance, set up to report on the 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 119 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


first 50 years of the UN, talks of ‘Our Global Neighbourhood’, arguing that a mediated, enforced global proximity is generating cosmopolitanism (UN Commisssion of Global Governance; Tomlinson l999: ch. 6; Beck 2000). In the early years of South Africa’s move away from apartheid, Nelson Mandela would often refer to ‘the people of South Africa and the world who are watching’ on their TV screens (UN Commission of Global Governance 1995: 107). The ‘we’ in Mandela’s speeches almost always evoked those beyond South Africa who were viewing it on the global media and were collectively participating in the country’s rebirth through an enforced televisual proximity. When Mandela stated that ‘we are one people’ he was pointing both to South Africa and to the rest of the world, those who were witnessing its travails. Likewise, the pointing from the TV commentators to the collective ‘we’ at Princess Diana’s funeral was to the 2.5 billion people witnessing and sharing on the global screen, as this iconic ‘global healer’ was sanctified by (almost) the whole world (Richards, Wilson, Woodhead 1999: 3). Indeed, since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 there have been various ‘global events’ when ‘The Whole World is Watching’ (Gitlin 1980), including highly televized disasters such as the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September 2001, the Asian Tsunami of 26 December 2004, and the destruction of New Orleans by Hurricane Katrina on 29 August 2005. Such collective global events are  key to the forming of such a cosmopolitan culture, perhaps beginning with  the founding moment of the Nuremberg trials in the immediate postwar period.
But this technology question is implicitly married to what we will call the  
psychological question of social presence: What properties of humans elicit  
attributions of psychological states to representations, as if those representations  
contained minds? All the dimensions of social presence used by researchers such as  
“intimacy,” “involvement,” and “mutual understanding” circle one basic  
phenomenon, that social presence may be the product of the process of “reading a  
mind” behind a representation. Of course, these cognitive mechanisms have their  
origins in more basic social communication processes.
The psychological questions of social presence may be part of the larger  
issue of the “theory of mind” or how individuals have “knowledge of other minds,”  
or more specifically infer intentional states to others (Gordon, 1986; Carruthers  
and Smith, 1996; Premack and Premack, 1996). The philosopher of mind, Daniel  
Dennett, (Dennett, 1987; Dennett, 1996) has suggested that the tendency to infer  
agency and mental states to inert entities, what he calls the intentional stance, may  
have evolved as a successful strategy to reason about the environment.
When people experience social presence are they using bodily cues, or  
technological representations of bodily cues (e.g., facial expressions) to infer the  


    
34  
psychological states of others? Social presence, the sense that one is together with  
another, may be the by-product of reading or simulating the minds (mental states)  
of virtual others? When interacting with agents or robots, for example, users “read  
minds” and respond socially, even when they know that no mind or social other  
really exists. Fundamentally, when responding to all social representations we know  
that the “other” is just ink on paper or patterns of light on a screen, yet the social  
responses are automatic. Discovering how to better trigger, sustain, and enhance  
these social cues becomes part of the design outcomes of social presence theory.
A theory of social presence, how we generate mental models of virtual  
others in mediated communication, is a subset of this larger research challenge. The  
fundamental theoretical question of how one comes to “know other minds” has a  
long, complex, but interesting history in the fields of philosophy and psychology  
(Carruthers, 1996; Dennett, 1987; 1996; Rosenthal, 1991). It may be that a full  
understanding of social presence may benefit from being informed by a larger  
theory of how we automatically interpret physical forms and nonverbal and verbal  
codes to simulate and infer the content of other minds. A theory of social presence  
many need to simultaneously address both the technology questions about media  
form and the psychological question about reading minds in representations. When  
this approach has been adopted, the results have been enlightening (e.g., Reeves  
and Nass, 1996), although Reeves and Nass limit their theoretical exploration of the  
psychological question to a very general reference to the operation of an “old brain”  
designed to accept the sensory input of technological simulation as real. Social  
presence theory may benefit by seeking to forge a deeper link between the brain,


    
35  
the properties that reads minds in representations, and technology, the properties  
that simulates agency in inanimate things such as pixels, paint, and clay.
Focus on mediated-interaction and technological differences?
52 –2 
.0 5 
po 0.
00 1 
Health Service Utilization in the Former Soviet Union 1941 


In Georgia, the lower use of district primary care facilities is, to some extent, counterbalanced by a much higher use of private facilities, with 16 percent of last contacts in this sector, compared with a maximum of 6 percent (Kazakhstan) in the other countries.
Utilization in Different Hypothetical Scenarios 
The analyses so far have looked at actual behavior in relation to episodes of illness, with the nature of the illness undefined (of necessity, given the vast range of possible conditions and the difficulty of categorizing them for analysis). Another way to assess experience of obtaining care (combining information that respondents will have obtained from their own experiences and those of friends and relations) is to ask what they would do when faced with a range of common health conditions. The situations in which formal medical advice ismost likely to be sought include fever lastingmore than three days (38 percent), abdominal pain (24 percent), and chest pain (18 percent). Self-treatment, including use of home remedies and alcohol, is especially common in cases of cough or diarrhea, but is widely used for all complaints. Purchase of pharmaceuticals without prescription is also common, especially for headache, bad cough, and diarrhea.
Differences between countries were explored in more detail by focusing only on the three conditions perceived to be most likely to justify seeking care (chest pains, abdominal pains, fever lasting more than three days). The 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Belarus Moldova Russia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Ukraine Armenia Georgia 
medical post/local policlinic hospital/specialized facility occupational facility private facility patient's home 
Figure 4: Location of Most Recent Encounter with a Health Professional 
1942 HSR: Health Services Research 39:6, Part II (December 2004) 


probability of seeking care varies widely among countries.Whereas in Belarus 56 percent would consult with a health professional where there was a prolonged fever, only 16 percent would do so in Armenia (Figure 5).
Health-seeking behavior was explored further by asking what someone should do if theywere in need of urgent hospitalization but were told that there was a waiting list of several months. The most frequently mentioned course of action was using informal mechanisms, such as use of connections (36.7 percent) or offering health professionals money (28.5 percent). More transparent strategies such as seeking to persuade hospital staff or lodging a complaint scoredmuch lower on the list. Another 7.8 percent would turn to alternative or traditional healers and 15.2 percent believed there was nothing they could do. The percentage of those saying they would pay or use connections varied (Figure 6) but there was no clear pattern, so that the figures were similar in Belarus and Georgia, despite very different access to care in the two countries as shown by responses to earlier questions.
DISCUSSION 
The creation of the Soviet health care system was, by any standards, a remarkable achievement. Prior to the liberation of the serfs in 1861, health care in rural Russia was virtually nonexistent. The situation began to change in 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Belarus Kyrgyzstan Moldova Russia Kazakhstan Ukraine Georgia Armenia 
Pe rc 
en ta 
ge 
Fever for more than 3 days Abdominal pain Chest pains 
Figure 5: Would You Consult a Health Professional in the Case of . . . ?
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 747 


look at the effect of moving from the least open to the most open regimes instead, then this raises the GS rates by up to 11+15 and 7+9 points in the case of trade and FDI openness, respectively+ Another way to demonstrate the effect of economic openness is to look at predicted values from the estimations+ Based on the columns ~7! and ~8!, the average predicted GS rates for the countries with trade and FDI openness below the median are 5+10 and 5+61 percent, respectively, whereas the relevant values for countries with openness above the median are 8+19 and 7+43 percent, respectively+ These predicted rates are close to the actual averages from the bivariate analysis reported above, which suggests that the observed differences between relatively closed and relatively open economies uphold after controlling for several important determinants of GS+ 
Notice that all the three methods used for the analysis of the data produce somewhat similar results with our control variables+ Per capita income is strongly positively associated with GS across the testing procedures+ However, the effect is nonlinear suggesting that per capita income raises GS with diminishing returns+ The economic growth rate is not statistically significant+ Given that higher income levels are good for GS, growth’s long-term, accumulated effect should be positive, however+ A higher percentage of an economy devoted to agriculture is negative for accumulating GS in columns ~7! and ~8!+ This result provides some limited support to those who argue that the modernization of economies promotes sustainability+ Events of currency crises do not lower the GS rate+ Dependence on oil extraction has a strong negative effect on the GS rate as others have 
FIGURE 3. Period mean values of economic freedom (horizontal) and genuine savings rates (vertical axis) 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 18042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:748 
?
?
?
748 International Organization 


also reported+86 This result is statistically highly significant and substantively very large+ Being an oil export-dependent country lowers the GS rate by an average of roughly 20 percentage points+ 
Democracy’s effect on GS is positive and statistically significant only in the last two columns when the PCSE method is used+ Our results suggest that democracy’s actual performance does not necessarily match the degree of emphasis on this variable in the academic and popular discussions on sustainability+ However, its positive effect, even if only statistically significant in PCSE estimation, is encouraging and warrants closer analysis+ Moreover, given our crude dichotomization of the Polity measure, future research should focus on disaggregating types of democracies, as differing democratic institutions produce varying policy outcomes+87 At the same time, we find that neither constraints on policymakers nor governmental stability affect the GS rate+ 
More densely populated societies are associated with higher GS rates, contrary to the pervasive neo-Malthusian discussions on sustainable development+ In other words, population pressure within a territorial unit does not inhibit GS, but it promotes it, net of the other control variables in the model, such as income+ Population size, on the other hand, is negative, but the results are far from statistical significance+ Higher percentages of urban population, net of the influence of the other control variables, seem to be detrimental to the GS rate+ 
Civil war experience lowers the GS rate, but a longer period of peace exerts a positive and statistically significant effect only in columns ~7! to ~9!+ These results are net of income+ Given war’s detrimental effects on income, the overall effect on gains to GS from peace is bigger still+ This interesting subject too warrants further reflection and more analysis given the recent theoretical arguments about natural resource dependence and civil war+88 
Are our results generated by the presence of developed countries in the sample? To provide a fair test of the effect of globalization on sustainability, we need to check whether our results uphold for the countries critics of globalization are most concerned about+ In Table 2, we repeat estimations for subsamples of countries+ To save space, we concentrate on results from PCSE estimations+ In columns ~1! and ~2!, we restrict the sample to developing countries, dropping Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Northern American and Western European countries+ In columns ~3! and ~4!, we further restrict the sample to countries classified as falling into the low-income category by the World Bank+ In columns ~5! and ~6!, we check whether results uphold for those developing countries, which trade more than proportionally with Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ~OECD! countries by restricting the sample to countries whose trade with OECD countries divided by GDP is above the median value+ Next, we explore whether trade open-

86+ Hamilton 2001+ 87+ See de Soysa 2003; Lijphart 1994; and Powell 2000+ 88+ Collier et al+ 2003+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 19042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:749 
?

U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs National Institute of Justice 
R   e   s   e   a   r   c   h        i   n        B   r   i   e   f 
National Institute of Justice February 2001 
continued… 
Disorder in Urban Neighborhoods— Does It Lead to Crime?  By Robert J. Sampson and Stephen W. Raudenbush 
According to a now-familiar thesis, social and physical disorder in urban neighborhoods can, if unchecked, lead to serious crime. The reasoning is that even such minor public incivilities as drinking in the street, spray-painting graffiti, and breaking windows can escalate into predatory crime because prospective offenders assume from these manifestations of disorder that area residents are indifferent to what happens in their neighborhood.1 
The “broken windows” thesis has greatly influenced crime control policy, with New York City best exemplifying the use of aggressive police tactics to stem disorder. Many other cities have adopted similar “zero tolerance” policies, cracking down on even the most minor offenses.
There is no doubt that understanding physical and social disorder in public spaces is fundamental to understanding urban neighborhoods. Certainly, visual signs of decay silently but forcefully convey messages about affected neighborhoods. Disorder triggers attributions and predictions in the minds of insiders and outsiders alike, changing the calculus of prospective homebuyers, real estate agents, insurance agents, and investors. The extent of disorder reflects the extent of residents’ effectiveness in improving their neighborhoods and may affect their willingness to sustain their activism.
Disorder is indeed related to crime. The broken windows metaphor is apt insofar as it asserts that physical signs of decay signal neighbors’ unwillingness to confront strangers, intervene when a crime is being committed, or ask the police to respond. Disorder may in fact be more useful than crime for understanding certain troubling urban processes, such as the abandonment of many of the Nation’s urban cores. That is because disorder can be observed, while crime, by contrast, is largely unobserved. But the contention that disorder  is an essential cause in the pathway to predatory crime is open to question. Reported here are the results of research that revisits the assumption of disorder as providing cues that entice potential predators.
Rethinking disorder 
The research was part of the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods, a long-term study of the antecedents of antisocial and criminal behavior being conducted among a large group of people in a number of Chicago neighborhoods. (For a description, see “The Roots of the Study: The Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods.”) The major goal of this phase of the study was to rethink the consequences of disorder and examine its sources.
Issues and Findings Discussed in this Brief: The link between disorder and crime; specifically, whether manifestations of social and physical disorder, such as public drunkenness, graffiti, and broken windows, lead directly to more serious offenses. The study, part of the long-range Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods, assesses the “broken windows” thesis and  its implications for crime control policy and practice.
Key issues: The assumption that social and physical disorder can escalate to serious crime has had a major influence on law enforcement in many urban areas, resulting in police crackdowns on even minor incivilities. The research, conducted in 196 Chicago neighborhoods, assesses this thesis, proposing that crime stems from the same sources as disorder— structural characteristics of certain neighborhoods, most notably concentrated poverty.
Ellwood, C. 1990. The moral imperative of ethnic studies in urban teacher education programs. In Proceedings of the fourth national forum of the Association of Independent Liberal Arts Colleges for Teacher Education (1-6). Edited by M. Diez. Milwaukee: Alverno College.
Gallagher, P. 1993. Teachers-cultural assumptions: A hidden dimension of school teaching. Paper presented in Atlanta at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association.
Gay, G. 1986. Multicultural teacher education. In Multicultural education in western societies (154-77). Edited by J. Banks and J. Lynch. New York: Praeger.
Gollnick, D. 1992. Multicultural education: Policies and practices in teacher education. In Research & multicultural education (218-39). Edited by C. Grant. London: Falmer Press.
Gomez, M. L. In press. Teacher education reform and prospective teachers' perspectives on teaching other people's children. In Teaching & teacher education.
Gomez, M., and B. R. Tabachnick. 1991. Preparing preservice teachers to teach diverse learners. Paper presented in Chicago at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association.
Several studies relate TV viewing with global measures of subjective well-being and are thus closest to our design. In a study of roughly 3000 Americans in 1979 (Morgan, 1984), people watching a lot of TV considered their life to be more ‘‘lousy’’ on an index consisting of the aspects lonely, boring, depressing, unsatisfying, uneventful and unhappy, and less ‘‘great’’ on an index consisting of the aspects interesting, active, meaningful, fun, fulfilling, stimulating and exciting, compared with people watching less TV. In a random survey of 1000 West Germans, there is also a negative correlation between the duration of TV viewing and general life satisfaction, controlling for size of household, education and age (Espe & Seiwert, 1987). TV viewing has also been found to have a negative effect on life satisfaction due to reducing time spent in relational activities (Bruni & Stanca, 2007; for a broader argument see also Corneo, 2005; Putnam, 1995).
So far, the negative partial correlation between TV consumption and subjective wellbeing has been interpreted in terms of over-consumption leading to a lower utility level. However, the partial correlation could well be the result of reverse causation. It is quite plausible that unhappy people watch more TV than happy ones. In fact, Espe and Seiwert (1987) postulate a causal influence of dissatisfaction with life on TV consumption, but offer no corresponding evidence. Controlling for as many situational factors as possible in the regression equation can attenuate the problem. However, it cannot be resolved, neither with an extensive set of control variables in a multiple regression analysis nor with panel data.9 Ideally, one would need information about exogenous changes in the opportunities for TV consumption, e.g. due to satellite TV being shut down or due to TV being introduced in a new place because of technical innovation. We are not aware of any such event that could be connected to survey data on reported subjective well-being.
We propose a different approach for further analysis of the effect of TV consumption on subjective well-being and for shedding light on the issue of causality. First, additional hypotheses are formulated, exploiting the heterogeneity in the expected effect of TV over-consumption for different groups of people. Second, evidence is collected that extensive TV consumption is related to systematically different preferences and beliefs. This would support the view that there are long-term costs of TV consumption that are very difficult to foresee.
9 Panel data allow for the control of unobserved time-invariant individual specific factors that affect reported subjective well-being, as well as the explanatory variable of interest. This is not helpful in our analysis, because the entire theory is based on some people suffering from an unobserved time-invariant self-control problem.
B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 295 


6. The role of opportunity costs of time and changes in preferences and beliefs 
This section presents two extensions of the basic analysis on the statistical relationship between TVviewing and life satisfaction: (a)Opportunity costs of time are taken into account to assess the reduction in well-being due to self-control problems. (b) A path analysis is conducted to get an idea of the different ways that TV consumption can affect life satisfaction.
6.1. Opportunity costs of time and the effect of watching TV 
So far, it has been assumed that self-control problems in TV consumption affect everybody alike. Additional tests of the hypothesis that self-control problems in TV consumption reduce people’s utility are possible if different types of individuals can be identified who suffer to a different extent from over-consumption.We emphasize that in particular individuals with high opportunity costs of time can use timemore profitably when not watching TV. This includes, for instance, the self-employed (e.g. craftsmen, lawyers, architects or artists) or persons in high positions (e.g. managers, top bureaucrats or politicians), who can freely transfer time from leisure to work. For this group of individuals, the self-control problem of watching too much TV generates considerable costs. Their utility is lower due to their inability to fully control themselves. In contrast, individuals with low opportunity costs of time suffer little, if any, disutility when they fail to watch the amount of TV they would consider optimal for themselves. Accordingly, it is hypothesized that TV consumption significantly lowers the life satisfaction of individuals with high opportunity costs of time, while it has a smaller negative effect on the life satisfaction of individuals with low opportunity costs of time.
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 743 


policy regimes is totally infeasible+ Of course, in practice agreement is always feasible, so the maximum score is less than 1+ Not surprisingly, polcon is highly correlated with democracy+ However, the results reported below hardly change if either of the two variables is dropped from the model to address potential problems with multicollinearity+ The other governance measure captures the stability of the political system by counting the percent of veto players dropping out from government in any given year+ This variable is taken from the World Bank’s Database of Political Institutions+78 
Trade dependence, the savings rate, and environmental stress are affected by demographic factors+79 Thus, population size ~total population!, population density ~people per square kilometer!, and the share of urban population in total population are included in the models+ Urbanization has important implications for levels of pollution and investment in manufactured capital because it is argued that consumption rises with rising urbanization+80 These variables are all logged to minimize the effect of extreme values+ 
Finally, we enter control variables for experience with armed conflict, which presumably influences savings rates and the degree to which extractive activity, corruption, and accumulation of manufactured capital proceeds+We compute a count of peace years since 1946 employing the Uppsala-PRIO data on civil wars and using the BTSCS program in Stata+81 A civil war is defined as an internal war ~with and without foreign intervention! with 1,000 battle deaths or more+ The incidence of civil war is also added to the models to account for ongoing civil war, so as to capture any immediate effects above those of accumulated years of peace+ 
Appendix 3 provides summary statistics of the variables together with a bivariate correlation matrix+ A few correlations are above 0+4+ The urbanization rate and the agricultural share are the variables with the greatest number of high correlations++ They were also identified as potential problem variables by variance inflation factor analysis+ However, dropping these two variables or any of the other control variables with high correlations from the model hardly affects our results+ 
The analysis of time-series cross-sectional ~TSCS! data generally poses several problems in the estimating process+ TSCS data have complicated temporal and spatial structures that simple ordinary least squares ~OLS! cannot adequately account for+ TSCS models often allow for temporally and serially correlated errors as well 
78+ World Bank 2003b+ 79+ See Alesina and Spolaore 1997; and Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2003+ Neo-Malthusian 
views and antiglobalization views generally coincide on issues of sustainable development+ There is lively debate in the literature between the neo-Malthusians and the cornucopians, or those who think substitution of natural resources with human ingenuity is possible+ For the classic debate, see Myers and Simon 1994+ Most texts on environmental security and economic sustainability sample this debate+ See Conca and Dabelko 1998+ 
80+ Shafik 1994+ 81+ The civil war data ~Gleditsch et al+ 2002! can be downloaded from ^www+prio+no& and the 
BTSCS program for generating the peace years and splines ~Beck, Katz, and Tucker 1998! from ^www+vanderbilt+edu0;rtucker0programs0btscs0&+ Accessed 10 March 2005+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 14042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:744 
?
?
?
744 International Organization 


as for heteroskedasticity+ The well-known Parks method based on generalized least squares ~GLS!, which is close to the OLS method, is discredited for underestimating the true variability of the parameter estimates, which Beck and Katz report to be as high as 200 percent+82 They propose panel-corrected standard errors ~PCSE! together with OLS as an alternative procedure+ We follow this procedure, assuming an autoregressive error process of order one ~AR1!+ Note that for this estimator, we replace the year-specific dummies with a linear time trend because the estimated variance-covariance matrix is not positive definite if year dummies are used+83 For evaluating the robustness of the findings, we also estimate random effects GLS and population averaged models, or the generalized estimation equation ~GEE! method, which is yet another testing procedure when the underlying correlation structures in the data are unknown+84 In these estimations, an AR1 error process is also assumed+ All estimations pass a Wald- or F-test at conventional significance levels so that to save space no test statistics are reported+All the independent variables are lagged one year to mitigate simultaneity bias, although for our main variables of interest at least it will be hard to maintain that increased GS increases trade and FDI dependence, or economic freedom, not the other way around as the literature discussed above indicates+ 
Results 
During the period of our study, countries below the median of trade openness have an average GS rate of 4+11 percent with a standard deviation ~SD! of 8+56 compared to the average for countries above the median of 7+79 percent with a SD of 15+05+ For our FDI measure, the respective figures are 6+09 ~SD of 8+97! for countries below the median and 5+82 ~SD of 15+04! for countries above the median+ Countries below the median of the index of economic freedom have an average GS rate of 3+16 ~SD of 9+89! compared to 11+19 ~SD of 11+08! above the median+ Figure 1 plots the period mean value of the logged trade share against the GS rate, distinguishing between the developed countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ~OECD!, developing countries with below median natural resource intensity, and developing countries with above median natural resource intensity+ Figures 2 and 3 do the same for the logged FDI stock to GDP and the measure of economic freedom, respectively+ 
The much larger SDs of the more trade and FDI open countries suggest significant differences among this group of countries, which is likely to be rooted in variation in other explanatory variables and stresses the importance of controlling for these differences in our estimations+ Indeed, of the ten countries with the lowest 
82+ Beck and Katz 1995+ 83+ Results are robust toward replacing the linear time trend with five-year period dummies+ 84+ Zorn 2001+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 15042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:745 
?
Normative Developmental Patterns of Aggressive Behaviors 
Different views on the normative development of aggression have been proposed. For instance, the social learning perspective posits that children learn to aggress during the course of childhood and adolescence (Bandura, 1973; Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1998; Reiss & Roth, 1993) and that social influences, such as violent television or deviant peers, generally promote the expression of physical aggression (Johnson, Cohen, Smailes, Kasen, & Brook, 2002; Thornberry, 1998). Within this view, children are typically expected to exhibit more PA as they approach adolescence.
A different view posits that children learn to exert control over their emotions and their behaviors, and that they generally become more able to respect social norms as they age (Cairns, 1979; Goodenough, 1931; Tremblay, 2003; Tremblay & Nagin, 2005). Within this view, children are typically expected to exhibit less PA as they approach adolescence.
Studies investigating the development of aggression have reported increasing as well as decreasing levels of aggressive behaviors during the course of childhood. The specific developmental pattern appears to depend on two main sources of variation. The first is the type of aggressive behavior studied. For instance, levels of indirect or relational aggression (e.g., rumor spreading and peer group exclusion) appear to increase during the elementary school years (Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, Barker, Nagin, & Tremblay, in press; Crick, Ostrov, Appleyard, Jansen, & Casas, 2004; Tremblay et al., 1996; Vaillancourt, 2005), while levels of physical aggression appear to decrease (Broidy et al. 2003; Cairns et al., 1989; Coˆte´ et al., in press; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999). The second is the developmental period that is studied. For instance, levels of physical aggression were shown to increase during the preschool years (Tremblay et al., 2004) and to decrease from the preschool years to adolescence (Broidy et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999; NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 2004).
Atypical Developmental Patterns 
Recent longitudinal studies on the development of PA (Brame et al., 2001; Broidy et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999; NICHD ECCRN, 2004; Tremblay et al., 2004) have shown that there is heterogeneity in the development of aggression. That is, not all children follow the same developmental trajectories. For instance, although the majority of children follow declining trajectories of PA between kindergarten and grade 6, a minority of kindergarten children follow high and mostly stable trajectories (Broidy et al., 2003; Nagin & Tremblay, 1999). Furthermore, these kindergarten children are at risk for different forms of delinquency, including violence in adolescence (Broidy et al., 2003; Brame et al., 2001).
To date, we know little about the developmental patterns preceding high levels of physical aggression in kindergarten. There is evidence suggesting that some children begin to use physical aggression in kindergarten as a result of the stress generated by the transition from preschool to formal schooling. For example, Kingston and Prior (1995) identified a group of children who exhibited substantial increase in aggressive behaviors at the beginning of formal schooling. This group of children was mainly characterized by their poor adaptive functioning in school, suggesting that the stress related to school entry could have fostered the use of aggression (Kingston & Prior, 1995). Further support for this hypothesis comes from results indicating that low academic competence and problem behaviors influence each other at the beginning of formal schooling (Welsh, Parke, Widaman, & O’Neil,


Trajectories of Physical Aggression 73 
2001). Thus, highly physically aggressive kindergarten children may be those who are using aggression as a way of coping with a particularly stressful transition—entry into the formal school system.
Figure 1 Age adjusted hazard ratios of first long-term sickness absence by populations and employment grade 
Sickness absence in Japan and Britain 
415 
 by guest on M ay 7, 2013 
http://eurpub.oxfordjournals.org/ D 
ow nloaded from 
  



the Japanese cohort. However, a large part of these differences in sickness absence remained unexplained. Work-related factors, for example work demand, control and support, may also contribute to the explanation of socioeconomic differences in sickness absence.21,22 Furthermore, cultural and organizational differences may lead to differences in the propensity to take sickness absence. Several authors have discussed the concept of absence cultures.23,24 Absence cultures refer to shared attitudes about the level of sickness absence, which is tolerated by groups within organizations. The Industrial Society has published surveys of sickness absence rates in Britain.25 In this survey, the prevalence rates of sickness absence for the public sector, the private sector and Japanese-owned and managed companies operating in Britain were 4.6%, 3.9% and 2.4%, respectively. Differences in social security and other policies may also contribute to country differences in sickness absence rates.26,27 
Generalizations of these findings to the respective national working populations should be conducted with some caution, as both cohorts are recruited in workplaces and regions that may not be representative of the countries more generally. A specific comparability problem of this study is that the Japanese cohort includes both blue-collar and white-collar employees, but the British cohort includes only white-collar employees. It may thus be possible that the social distance between Japanese grades is larger than that between British grades. On the other hand, income differences between top and bottom status employees are smaller in the Japanese than in the British cohort.11 Accordingly, it seems likely that this smaller ‘social distance’ in the Japanese than in the British cohort explains part of the smaller grade gradients in the Japanese cohort. However, there are several common characteristics of both the Japanese firm and the civil service departments in London. Both workplaces have generous sickness absence policies, employees receive full pay for sickness absence, and are referred to occupational health services in the case of prolonged or repeated sickness absence. Both workplaces are considered to offer good job security. In summary, this study revealed that rates of sickness absence were higher in the British cohort than the Japanese cohort. We also demonstrated consistent socio-economic differences in long-term sickness absence in Japan, although these differences were smaller than in Britain. These socio-economic differences were only partly explained by differences in behavioural risk factors and self-rated health at baseline. However, it is possible that differences in work characteristics as well as absence cultures and organizational differences contribute to cross-national differences in sickness absence.
The Whitehall II study has been supported by grants from the Medical Research Council, British Heart Foundation, Health and Safety Executive, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (HL36310), National Institute on Aging (AG13196), Agency for Health Policy Research (HS06516), and the John D and Catherine T MacArther Foundation Research Networks on Successful Midlife Development and Socio-economic Status and Health. PM has been supported by the Academy of Finland (grant 7631 and 48600). MM is supported by a MRC Research Professorship.
  REFERENCES   
1 Statistic Division of the Department of Economic and  Social Affairs, United Nations. Demographic Yearbook 1997.  New York: United Nation, 1999.
2 Stehle G, Hinohara S, Cremer P, et al. Risk factor patterns  for coronary heart disease in China, Japan and Germany. Clin Med J 1992;105:356-9.
3 Marmot M, Davey Smith G. Why are the Japanese loving  longer? BMJ 1989;299:1547-51.
especially an awareness of both user/observer and mediated other. The user is  
aware of the mediated other, and the other is aware of the user. In Heeter’s  
(Heeter, 1992) definition, awareness of the “existence of the other” is  
accompanied by the other’s reaction to the self or user. In these definitions the  


    
15  
reaction of the other to the user validates that “they are there” and aware, and  
reflects the intellectual origins in symbolic interactionism, especially in the notion  
that the self is defined by the generalized other’s reaction.
This tends to flow directly into broader, if somewhat loosely explicated  
versions of co-presence that simply suggest mutual awareness with the phrase  
“being together” (de Greef and IJsselsteijn, 2000; Ho, Basdogan et al., 1998). In  
this sense, two users are aware of each other in a virtual space and that mutual  
awareness is the essence of social presence.
Psychological Involvement  
The simple presence of another body or even awareness of it may be  
satisfactory to signify some minimal level of physical co-presence. But does this  
capture all that most researchers mean by social presence? Let us take an extreme  
example. It is clear that a corpse may be physically present, but not socially  
present. Although the case extreme, this example may be to the point.  In virtual  
environments there can be many inert bodies, representations that are not  
“inhabited” by intelligence, human or artificial – virtual entities that are more like  
sculptures than beings, all form with no “spirit” or “intelligence” (agency) within  
them. So just the co-presence of a body may not be a good definitional basis for  
social presence, but rather the body is a set of cues for an “intelligence” that  
animates it. In theories that emphasize psychological involvement, social presence  
hinges more on one’s models of the other intelligence.
Therefore, some definitions extend social presence slightly beyond the notion  
of awareness to suggest the importance of an element sometimes labeled  


    
16  
psychological involvement. Unfortunately, the concept “involvement” has a very  
broad use within theories of communication, persuasion, and social psychology. It  
can range in meaning of little more than focused attention to the more elaborate  
psychological dynamics of relationships. Below we attempt to classify the various  
nuances of this general definitional approach to social presence.
Sense of access to intelligence. Some researchers (Biocca, 1997) have  
suggested that a key defining element of a theory of social presence is observers’  
modeling of the intentional states of the other (Dennett, 1987; Dennett, 1996). In  
a definitional approach that seeks to connect both mediated and un-mediated  
approaches, the body – be it virtual or physical - is conceptualized as a medium  
that provides cues to the intentional states of another. The actions of the body  
provide cues as to the states of the intelligence animating the body. The approach,
therefore, suggests that social presence is definable by the sense that one has  
“access to another intelligence” (Biocca, 1997). For example in Biocca (1997),
One aim of the present study is to examine, among a large (n = 10,658) nationally representative sample of boys and girls, the extent to which family risk factors can distinguish between typical and atypical trajectories of PA that begin in toddlerhood and continue during middle childhood for boys and girls. Specifically, we predicted trajectories of PA from family characteristics (i.e., early motherhood, age and education of the mother, low family income and family status), as well as family process variables such as family functioning, and parenting practices. According to some developmental models, such family risk environments may lead to coercive family interactions and promote the use of aggression among 


74 Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc, Nagin, and Tremblay 
children (e.g., Patterson, 1982; Patterson, Reid, & Dishion, 1992).
Sex Differences in the Development of Physical Aggression 
The limited amount of information concerning the comparative development of boys and girls’ aggressive behaviors during the early years is a notable gap in the literature. Hence, the preschool period may be particularly important for differentiating the problem behaviors of boys and girls, and information about this differentiation may shed light on the etiology of conduct problems.
Specifically, it has been suggested that the emergence of sex differences in externalizing behaviors (which comprise PA) occurs during the preschool years (Keenan & Shaw, 1997). Studies have clearly demonstrated that boys are more physically aggressive than girls after school entry (Broidy et al., 2003; Cairns et al., 1989; Tremblay et al., 1996). However, it is not clear whether boys are more aggressive during the preschool years. For instance, some reported no sex differences in externalizing behaviors (Hay et al., 2000) or in conduct problems (Keenan & Wakschlag, 2000) among preschoolers, while others reported boys (NICHD ECCRN, 2004; Tremblay et al., 1996; Tremblay et al., 2004), and still others girls (Munson et al., 2001) to be the more aggressive sex. Many of these studies used small and/or clinical samples. Thus, there is a need for studies examining the extent to which boys and girls follow different trajectories of PA during childhood in large population samples.
Study Objectives 
In the present study, we modeled the developmental trajectories (Boulerice, 2001; Nagin, 1999; Nagin, 2005) of PA among a nationally representative sample of Canadian children between 2 and 11 years of age in order to answer five questions: (1) what are the typical (normative) developmental trajectories of PA between 2 and 11 years of age? (2) is there a group of children who follow atypically elevated trajectories of PA throughout that age period? (3) is there a group of children who are not physically aggressive during toddlerhood but become physically aggressive as they enter school? (4) do sex differences become gradually larger between 2 and 11 years of age? and (5) what risk factors distinguish children who follow an atypically high PA trajectories from those who do not?
METHOD 
Sample 
The National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY) sample is a probability sample constructed while taking two important requirements into consideration. First, a sufficient sample was required in each of the 10 Canadian provinces to allow for the production of reliable estimates for all children 0 to 11 years of age. The sample allocation was derived in such a manner that smaller provinces had a sufficient sample to meet this requirement. A second requirement was to have a large enough sample to produce estimates at the Country level by seven key age groups (0–11 months; 1, 2 to 3, 4 to 5, 6 to 7, 8 to 9 and 10 to 11 years) (NLSCY 1994–1995).
All analyses conducted on the NLSCY are weighted. The principle behind estimation in a probability sample such as the NLSCY is that each person in the sample represents, besides himself or herself, several other persons not included in the sample. For example, in a 2% simple random sample of the population, each person in the sample represents 50 persons in the population. The weighting phase is a step which calculates, for each record, the number of individual in the population represented by a given record. In longitudinal analyses as those done in the present study, the modeling of the trajectories included probability weights that appropriately reflected the sampling strategy of this probability survey and accounted for non-response, attrition, rural-urban factor, inter-provincial migration, and post-stratification (NLSCY 1994–1995).
Eckstein and Tsiddon (2004) focus on one dimension of terrorism, the insecurity which 
manifests in daily life. Increasing terror makes life less certain and shorter.13 Using a 
closed-economy-infinite-horizon model, the government in charge of public security as a 
public good reduces the death toll by stepping up defense expenditures when terrorism 
increases. If it acts optimally, it does not fully offset the tide. A long-run equilibrium with 
an optimizing government is characterized by lower output, going with a higher intensity 
of terror. An econometric test for Israel, based on data from 1950 to 2003, indeed reveals 
an increase in the ratio of defense expenditures to GNP from 9% to 12% in the period of 
the Intifada (2000-2003:3) and a drastic reduction in output per capita. Over this period,
output per capita declined annually by 3%. If terrorism remains as high as it was in 2003,
per capita GDP will be about 3.5% lower by 2004:3 than if terrorism stops.
                                                   13 Other dimensions could be the effect of terror on the deterioration of health (thereby lowering productivity) and on human capital (Tsiddon 1995).


- 19 -

These effects of terrorist actions on the various sectors and the overall economy do not 
capture the total costs of terrorism. Non-market values are, by definition, excluded from 
these measures. The fear of individuals and the grief of the victims and the bereaved are 
disregarded. It follows that the damage perpetrated by terrorism may be considerably 
underestimated. If policy makers take the estimates discussed above seriously, they 
would allocate too little money to dealing with terrorism and rather use the funds and 
their energy for pursuing other goals. In the following section, therefore, methods are 
discussed for capturing total utility losses people suffer as a result of terrorist activities.
4 Utility consequences of terrorism 
The disutility from the public bad, terrorism, like the benefits from public goods, is 
inherently difficult to measure. However, a wide variety of different approaches for the 
measurement of preferences has been developed (see, e.g., Freeman 2003), in particular 
to value environmental quality and the cultural heritage. These approaches can potentially 
be applied to value the threat of terrorism as well. We briefly discuss existing techniques 
emphasizing possible advantages and likely drawbacks in the study of terrorism. The 
focus is on a new, and we think, promising approach: the life satisfaction approach.
Agriculture, Home Economics, Practical Skills and Guidance. The school is made of  
three Grade 7, two each of Grades 8, 9 and 10 classes. Most of the students are boarders  
who reside in two double stories dormitories each for boys and girls. A typical school  
day begins at 7.40 am and finishes at 1.50 pm, a duration of 8, 40-minutes lessons.


 10  
  
Students do work parades on Mondays, Wednesdays and Friday afternoons from 3.00 to  
4.00 pm to keep the school clean and play sports on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons.
There have been problems experienced at this school such as that of closing early during  
a term due to food shortage and also a high rate of absenteeism which results in fewer  
students in a class (normal class size = 40 students).
  
Method, Design and Procedures  
  
The first phase of this research was an ethnographic-interpretative study (Erickson,
1986) of interviews with eight village elders that probed their explanations of natural  
phenomena. The second phase involved the design, development and administration of  
two questionnaires on explanations of natural phenomena to 179 students.
  
Initially, elders in villages of the Gulf Province in PNG were interviewed about their  
explanations of natural phenomena and the stories that were passed down from one  
generation to the next. The interviews followed a structure format with a set of  
questions based on natural phenomena that included erosion and deposition, drought,

Village Elders’ and Secondary School Students’ Explanations of Natural  
Phenomena in Papua New Guinea  
  
Soikava Pauka  
Curriculum Reform Implementation Project  
National Capital District  
Papua New Guinea  
Email: spauka@crip.sagric.com   
  
David F. Treagust   
Science and Mathematics Education Centre  
Curtin University of Technology. Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
Email: d.treagust@curtin.edu.au  
  
Bruce Waldrip   
Faculty of Education  
University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia  
Email: waldrip@usq.edu.au  
  
Corresponding author: David F. Treagust   
Email: d.treagust@curtin.edu.au  
  
  


 2  
  
VILLAGE ELDERS’ AND SECONDARY SCHOOL STUDENTS’ EXPLANATIONS  
OF NATURAL PHENOMENA IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA  
  
  
ABSTRACT   
This research investigated the sources of explanations and understanding of natural  
phenomena in terms of the students’ cultural and school science experiences. The first  
phase involved interviews with eight village elders that probed their explanations and  
understanding of natural phenomena. The second phase involved the design,
development and administration of two questionnaires on natural phenomena to 179  
students in a rural boarding high school in Papua New Guinea (PNG). Most village  
elders gave explanations of many of the phenomena in terms of spirits, spells, magic;  
religion; and personal experiences. Most school-aged students choose scientific  
explanations of natural phenomena in terms of what they had learned in school or from  
personal experiences. However, many choose explanations of the same phenomena  
about spirits, spells and magic that came from the village, family or home. The study  
revealed that students’ ideas about natural phenomena are strongly governed and  
controlled by their school science knowledge in the school setting. It is likely that their  
own traditional knowledge cannot be identified in a school setting but that  
questionnaires in the students’ local language be given to students in their villages (as  
opposed to school). In addition, so as not to diminish the value of this traditional  
knowledge, science education programs are needed that are able to consider and  
harmonise traditional knowledge with school science  
  
Key words: scientific explanations, traditional knowledge; learning science  


 3  
  
Papua New Guinea, situated north of Australia, is a culturally diverse developing  
country with a population of 4.5 million Melanesians. The people speak over 715  
different languages and belong to many different cultural tribes (Central Intelligence  
Agency, 2004). The tribal clans view nature as a whole; continuity from the past to the  
present and into the future; the clans are linked with the surrounding land, water forests,
and heavens (Waiko & Jiregari, 1982). The wisdom and accumulated tools for dealing  
with and living in the environment are contained in this knowledge base which is  
learned by repetition, reinforced rituals, sanctions on the ancestors, or rewards from the  
spirits. For example, Kiki (1963) in his autobiography ‘Kiki Ten Thousand Years in a  
Lifetime’ confirms that his mother’s people referred to the dead as ‘going to the west’  
because their dead were not buried in the ground but placed high up in tree branches  
facing the sunset. The people did not believe in the last judgement and had no concept  
of heaven or hell. But they believed that the dead were ever present and they can be  
called upon to help in any dangerous situation. Similarly the ‘Toaripi’ of the Gulf  
Province referred to their dead ancestors to a dwelling place of the dead called ‘alaua-

ipi kivokipi’ which connotes a place beyond the western horizon where spirits of the  
dead were supposed to dwell. Thus the exclamation ‘alaua-ipi meaforoe a’ is often said  
where there is a beautiful sunset, ‘what lovely weather in the spirit land’ (Brown, 1968).
Thus, Australia is referred to as the spirit land where the dead were supposed to dwell.
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe394 


Similar to Schmeidl (1997), Davenport et al. (2003) find that measures of civil war, genocide/politicide, and the lagged stock of refugees are highly significant predictors of refugee flows. In addition, they find that dissident violence short of outright civil war also represents a cause of forced migration. At the same time, they find interstate war to be highly insignificant. This is contrary to Schmeidl’s suggestion that interstate wars create IDPs rather than refugees, since the former are included in Davenport et al.’s (2003) analysis. Using gross national product (GNP) per capita as the more direct and valid measure of poverty, they find it to be highly insignificant. Interestingly, autocratic regimes also do not create more or less refugees than democracies once other factors are controlled for, confirming the result by Schmeidl (1997), but changes in the regime of a country are associated with higher refugee flows. Moore and Shellman (2003) extend the analysis of Davenport et al. (2003) to the 
period 1964–1995. Like Davenport, Moore, and Poe, they also find that both state-executed violence as well as violence ordained by dissident groups is the main cause of forced migration. The same is true for human rights abuses. Contrary to both Schmeidl (1997) and Davenport et al. (2003), a higher average income level, as measured by GNP per capita, is associated with higher flows of refugees and IDPs. However, in comparing how a change from minimum to maximum value of independent variables changes the expected number of forced migrants, they find that GNP per capita is a substantively unimportant variable relative to the measures of violence and human rights abuse. To sum up, existing quantitative studies of the causes of flows of refugees and IDPs find that political violence and civil war are the main reasons why people flee. These findings are buttressed by more qualitative analysesFsee, for example, Cohen and Deng (1998) and the references cited therein. With respect to asylum migration, only a few quantitative studies exist. Vogler 
and Rotte (2000) extend earlier work by Rotte, Vogler, and Zimmermann (1997) to asylum migration from 86 Asian and African countries to Germany over the period 1981–1995 using FE estimation. They find the predicted bell-shaped relationship with income per capita and a negative effect of economic growth on asylum migration, measured as asylum seekers divided by the population of the country of origin. Human rights violations have a positive effect on migration. Political regime type (democracy vs. autocracy) either does not matter or, somewhat unexpectedly, leads to more asylum migration from democracies. A positive effect is also found for the urbanization rate. Existing immigration groups attract greater asylum flows. German aid flows to source countries do not matter, whereas trade flow coefficients are significant, but with an unexpected negative sign. Holzer, Schneider, and Casey (2002) analyze the combined number of asylum 
seekers over the period 1990–1995 in Germany and Switzerland, using a negative binomial regression technique in a cross-sectional sample.9 Referring to their general model, they find that poorer countries with higher infant mortality rates send more asylum seekers. Human rights violations exert a positive effect on asylum migration as do geographical closeness and existing migrant groups. A dummy for violent conflict as well as a variable measuring the number of war deaths turns out to be highly insignificant, however. Summing up, in comparison with the studies looking at refugees and IDPs in 
developing countries, the studies addressing asylum migration to developed countries indicate that economic factors are more important determinants of migration. This is not surprising given that the developed destination countries are much 
9 An earlier paper by Holzer, Schneider, and Widmer (2000b) uses time-series analysis to show that legislative deterrence measures reduced the inflow of asylum seekers to Switzerland over the period 1986–1995, but were unsuccessful in the face of very strong push factors in nearby regions, for example, the civil war in the former Yugoslavian republics.
  
This list emphasizes the role of semiosis and its material supports in securing social  reproduction through the selection and retention of mutually supportive discourses.  Conversely, the absence or relative weakness of one or more of these semiotic  and/or extra-semiotic conditions may undermine previously dominant discourses  and/or block the selection and retention of appropriate innovative discourses. This  absence or weakness is especially likely in periods of profound disorientation due to  rapid social change and/or crises that trigger major semiotic and material innovations  in the social world. We should note here that the semiotic and extra-semiotic space  for variation, selection, and retention is contingent, not pre-given. This also holds for  the various and varying semiotic and material elements whose selection and  retention occurs in this ‘ecological’ space. In a complex world there are many sites  and scales on which such evolutionary processes operate and, for present purposes,  what matters is how local sites and scales come to be articulated to form more global  (general) sites and scales and how the latter in turn frame, constrain, and enable  local possibilities (Wickham 1987). These interrelations are themselves shaped by  the ongoing interaction between semiotic and extra-semiotic processes.
Integrating Critical Semiotic Analysis into Political Economy    
A particularly interesting moment in the development of economic imaginaries is the  emergence of crises affecting economic identities and performance. A CPE approach  


 11  
implies that crisis is never a purely objective process or moment that automatically  produces a particular response or outcome. Instead a crisis emerges when  established patterns of dealing with structural contradictions, their crisis-tendencies,  and dilemmas no longer work as expected and, indeed, when continued reliance  thereon may even aggravate the situation. Crises are most acute when crisis-tendencies and tensions accumulate across several interrelated moments of the  structure or system in question, limiting room for manoeuvre in regard to any  particular problem. Changes in the balance of forces mobilized behind and across  different types of struggle also have a key role in intensifying crisis-tendencies and in  weakening and/or resisting established modes of crisis-management (Offe 1984: 35-64). This creates a situation of more or less acute crisis, a potential moment of  decisive transformation, and an opportunity for decisive intervention. In this sense, a  crisis situation is unbalanced: it is objectively overdetermined but subjectively  indeterminate (Debray 1973: 113). And this creates the space for determined  strategic interventions to significantly redirect the course of events as well as for  attempts to 'muddle through' in the (perhaps forlorn) hope that the situation will  resolve itself in time. In short, crises are potentially path-shaping moments.
Such path-shaping is mediated semiotically as well as materially. Crises encourage  semiotic as well as strategic innovation. They often prompt a remarkable proliferation  of alternative visions rooted in old and new semiotic systems and orders. Many of  these will invoke, repeat, or re-articulate established genres, discourses, and styles;  others may develop, if only partially, a ‘poetry for the future’ that resonates with new  potentialities (Marx 1996: 32-34). Which of the proliferating alternatives, if any, is  eventually selected, retained and consolidated is mediated in part through discursive  struggles to define the nature and significance of the crisis and what might follow  from it. If the crisis can be interpreted as a crisis in the existing economic order, then  minor reforms and a passive revolution will first be attempted to re-regularize that  order. If this fails and/or if the crisis is already interpreted initially as a crisis of the  existing economic order, a discursive space is opened to explore more radical  changes. In both cases conflicts also concern how the costs of crisis-management  get distributed and the best policies to escape from the crisis.
Case-Based Instruction. Another instructional strategy that is used to prepare 
teachers for cultural diversity is case-based teaching. In one of our program sites, the 
University of Alaska—Fairbanks (Kleinfeld 1989) as well as at the Far West Laboratory in 
San Francisco with the "Case Methods in Multicultural Education Project” (Shulman 1992; 


Shulman and Mesa-Bains 1990; Gallagher 1993), teacher educators are using case studies,
illustrating the challenges of teaching diverse students, to prepare more culturally sensitive 
and interculturally competent teachers.
Teacher educators have argued that cases are uniquely suited to the analysis of the 
complex and emotionally charged issues of teaching in culturally unfamiliar contexts. It is felt 
that cases can help prospective teachers develop a social map of a cultural terrain and 
interpret the social meaning of unfamiliar cultural events (Kleinfeld 1989).
Cases allow teachers to discuss race and class issues openly, reflect on previously held views about different cultures, and confront their own potential prejudices and stereotypes... The case approach can also provide a mechanism that enables both majority and minority teachers to talk together, through the distance of the case, about issues that might be too difficult to discuss openly (Shulman and Mesa-Bains 1990, p. 4) 
Shulman (1992) points out, however, that cases, like other instructional strategies 
used to prepare teachers for cultural diversity, do not, by themselves, lead to greater cultural 
sensitivity and intercultural competence. The cultural sensitivity of the teacher educators 
using the strategies is critical.
Cases, even with commentaries, do not teach themselves. Discussion leaders must not only be sensitive to the issues represented in the cases but also acutely aware of their own biases and intercultural blindness. They must understand the problems portrayed from multiple perspectives. And they must be able to anticipate in detail the variety of responses each case evokes, both emotionally and intellectually (pp. 21-22).
Field Experiences. Perhaps the most common strategy used to prepare teachers for 
diversity is a field experience in schools serving ethnic- and/or language-minority students.
· Defining the scope of social behavior that elicits social presence and that clearly  
indicates a social presence state as opposed to an effect of social presence.
· Setting criteria for measurement that are broad enough to cover the full range  
of media technologies and types of social interactions.
Below we propose is the need for a theory of social presence that explicates  
and works toward operationaliz ing the concept in such a way that it provides the  


    
32  
basis for understanding, explaining, predicting, measuring, controlling, and designing  
for appropriate levels of social presence.
Toward a Theory and Measure of Social Presence:   
Suggested Criteria, Scope, and Example Scenarios  
The beginning of this article indicated that various areas of HCI research  
might benefit from a theory of social presence that can support greater explanatory  
power and, possibly, generate a more predictive and useable measure. How might  
social presence researchers - among which we include ourselves - move past what  
we have identified as potential barriers? In this section we try to provide a  
contribution towards a more solid grounding for social presence research by: (a)  
seeking to ground the fundamental theoretical question of social presence in a  
framework that might expand its explanatory power, and (b) define the scope of  
the social communication phenomena that might specify the scope of behavior that  
a theory of social presence could legitimately address if it is to have broad  
explanatory power.
Search for the fundamental theoretical question addressed by social presence  
theory and measurement  
Having disassembled existing theories of social presence into parts, it may be  
wise to start to “rebuild” a theory of social presence. A good start is to look for the  
basic question at the very heart of the research enterprise. One fundamental  
question that drives researchers’ understanding of mediated social presence is:  
What are the properties of representations of other beings that elicit social  


    
33  
responses from users-viewers? We will call this the technology question as it drives  
much of social presence research.  Designers have manipulated social responses  
for centuries via representations of people in paintings, sculpture, and numerous  
other media. It is understandable that the technology question would be the most  
natural starting point for most design oriented researchers such as Short, Williams,
and Christie.
?
INO05025 
International Organization 59, Spring 2005, pp+ 731–772 © 2005 by The IO Foundation+ DOI: 10+10170S0020818305050253 


role of relative prices and by punishing inefficient policymaking, which should promote both current and future welfare+3 
This study will examine the effects of openness to trade and foreign direct investment ~FDI! on an index of economic freedom on national genuine savings ~GS! rates ~adjusted net savings!, a broad indicator of ~weak! sustainability with wide coverage spanning a period of twenty years+4 This index is a measure of the rate at which investment in manufactured, human, and natural capital exceeds its depreciation+5 This measure is based on a widely held precept that sustainable development is the ability to maintain ~increase! the aggregate value of manufactured, human, and natural capital, with natural capital being defined as anything in nature providing value to human beings+6 Atkinson and Hamilton conclude a recent paper by suggesting that “it would be interesting in future work to examine the determinants of the genuine savings rate+”7 This is the first study to test the effects of market globalization and economic freedom on GS+ We find positive and statistically significant effects that are robust toward a whole battery of sensitivity tests by way of different estimation techniques, inclusion of different control variables, and various subsamples of the data+ 
Today, the World Bank and other organizations devoted to development distinguish between “good” and “bad” growth+8 The World Bank’s GS rate is a result of this new thinking+ Because the assumption of this approach is that substitutability between various forms of capital is high, this measure is admittedly one that captures “weak sustainability+”9 In contrast, strong sustainability is the view that all natural capital should be kept intact and that substitutability between forms of capital is not possible+ Strong sustainability arguments in the globalization debate, however, are less prevalent given the preoccupation of both the right and left with the creation of jobs, economic growth, and concerns over relative economic wellbeing++ In fact, strong environmentalism, largely prevalent in developed countries, views sustainable development to be a contradiction in terms+ One popular measure of strong sustainability is the concept of ecological footprints ~EF!+ This concept relates to the amount of environmental resources, defined as the available area of land ~habitat!, required for sustaining the current levels of consumption as well as for absorbing waste and pollution resulting from consumption+10 This concept gives little room for the substitution of environmental resources with manufactured capital, nor can it adequately account for trade as a substitute for scarcity+ 
3+ See World Bank 1992; Pearce and Warford 1993; Neumayer 2002a; and Bhagwati 2004+ 4+ See Atkinson and Hamilton 2003; Hamilton 2001; and World Bank 1997+ The term “genuine 
savings” was coined by Kirk Hamilton and subsequently appears as “net adjusted savings” in the World Development Indicators+ 
5+ World Bank 2002+ 6+ See Atkinson et al+ 1997; Goodwin 2003; Hamilton and Clemens 1999; and Mikesell 1992+ 7+ Atkinson and Hamilton 2003, 1804+ 8+ Thomas et al+ 2000+ 9+ See Costanza and Jørgensen 2002; Neumayer 2004; and Pearce and Atkinson 1993+ 
10+ Wackernagel et al+ 1999+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 2042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:732 
?
?
?
732 International Organization 


For example, Singaporeans have more ~and better! water resources at their disposal than large resource wealthy states such as Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of Congo, or Angola because human and manufactured capital compensate for natural resource scarcity+ In this article, we mainly focus on how increasing globalization determines a state’s chances for achieving weak sustainability+ We believe that any conception of sustainability must leave at least some room for substitutability ~we do not think that universities should not be built if trees have to be destroyed!+ Also, weak sustainability is a necessary condition for achieving strong sustainability+ In addition, we also briefly address the issue of strong sustainability+ 
Estimating the effect of globalization and economic freedom on weak sustainability is not just an academic question+ Policymakers at many levels seek to harmonize urgent societal requirements, such as growth of income, employment, and general well-being, while ensuring intra- and intergenerational equity+ Many recognize that current economic accounting does not fully reflect the trade-offs among various forms of capital+11 For example, economic rents derived from resource extraction and tree cutting do not fully represent income in that part of the rents represent depreciation of the natural capital stock+ Similarly, economic development that comes at the expense of environmental harm may reduce future wellbeing++ The green accounting program within economics seeks to value investment and depreciation of all forms of capital so that trade-offs among various forms of capital can be better accounted for+ The maintenance of all forms of capital that are valuable for production and consumption is regarded as a desirable goal, a notion widely accepted by the pioneers in the profession who seek to measure sustainability so as to translate knowledge into policy+12 This article is organized as follows: first, we examine arguments about globalization and economic sustainability; next we examine the relevance of GS as an important empirical indicator measuring the concept of sustainability; then we present our results; and finally we conclude+ 
Economic Openness and Sustainability 
This study approaches the question of globalization and sustainability from a national perspective by measuring the degree to which states are exposed to, or are connected with, the global economic system+ It is standard practice to measure globalization as “interconnectedness” through trade and FDI penetration+13 According to Mikesell, “a comprehensive treatise on sustainable development should integrate the macroeconomics of conventional development with the special concern 
11+ See Dasgupta 2001; and Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2003+ 12+ Pearce and Warford 1993+ 13+ See Birdsall and Lawrence 1999; and Nye and Donahue 2000+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 3042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:733 
?


- 22 -

reflect anticipated future risk rather than current risk. Finally, revealed preference 
methods cannot capture non-use values.
4.2 Effects on Life Satisfaction 
People’s assessment of their overall well-being can be directly captured by measures of 
reported subjective well-being. In large representative questionnaire studies, individuals 
are asked about their level of life satisfaction or happiness. This opens new possibilities 
for studying important economic questions (see Frey and Stutzer 2002a,b for surveys).
For example, with reported subjective well-being as a proxy measure for utility, it is now 
a straightforward strategy to directly evaluate public goods, or a public bad like terrorism,
in utility terms. By measuring the marginal utility of a public good or the marginal 
disutility of a public bad, as well as the marginal utility of income, the marginal rate of 
substitution between income and the public good can be calculated. This allows for the 
computation of relevant welfare measures for marginal and infra-marginal changes in the 
public good provision. We call this the life satisfaction approach.16 
It stands to reason that people living in a country rife with terrorism are less happy than 
those living under more orderly political conditions. An example is the Dominican 
Republic in 1962 where, after president Trujillo’s murder, the political situation was very 
unsettled and political chaos was a real threat. The level of life satisfaction recorded in 
that country was the lowest ever recorded, namely 1.6 on a 0 to 10 scale. In contrast, in 
politically stable democracies, such as Switzerland, Norway or Denmark, the population 
expresses high levels of life satisfaction. The corresponding values were, for example, in 
the 1990s 8.16 for Denmark, 8.02 for Switzerland and 7.66 for Norway. Thus, happiness 
and political stability seem to be closely related.
The life satisfaction approach has several important advantages over the approaches 
discussed so far in measuring people’s utility losses due to terrorist activity. Contrary to 
contingent valuation surveys, this approach does not rely on asking people how they 
value a public good or an anti-terrorism policy. The hypothetical nature of these 
questions and the unfamiliar situation for the respondents are the principal reasons for 
                                                   16 See Welsch (2002) and van Praag and Baarsma (2004) for the evaluation of externalities in the environmental realm with reported subjective well-being data.


- 23 -

most of the skepticism about, and problems concerning, the contingent valuation method.
The consortium approach also relegates concerns about diversity to "them" rather 
than to "us." While the Chicago program, for example, has documented numerous successes 
with individual students over its nearly thirty-year history and provides teacher education 
expertise unavailable on the home campuses of students, it nonetheless largely segregates 
(with some exceptions) teacher education for diversity to the experiences students have 
outside of their home institutions. Although the 15-member colleges are geographically 
unable to provide field experiences in diverse settings for their students, and while we know 
of a few faculty in these colleges who care deeply about issues of diversity and equity, the 
fact remains that these concerns are not treated systematically in the students' liberal 
education. Yet as Bok (1986) has noted, a liberal education should include 
[the development of] an awareness of other cultures with their differing values, traditions, and institutions. By having the chance to explore many opportunities, they should acquire lasting intellectual and cultural interests, [and] gain in self-knowledge. . . .Through working and living with a wide variety of fellow students, they should achieve greater social maturity and acquire a tolerance of human diversity (pp. 54-55).
Quite simply, teacher education for diversity is the responsibility of the total 
institution. While consortia can provide special opportunities for students that home 
institutions might be unable to provide, the home institutions should not abdicate their 
responsibilities for the full scope of a student's liberal education on the road to 
becoming a teacher.
The partnership approach also has limitations. Cooperative efforts between higher 
education institutions were more popular in the 1970s and 1980s than they are now, as a 
result of federal and state legislation and judicial decisions to desegregate racially separate 
colleges and universities and to restructure state systems in response to shrinking revenues.
Although some such partnerships remain, the lessons learned from prior efforts indicate that 
governments and courts cannot automatically legislate cooperation between institutions, and 
especially those that have historically been unequal. Success of these efforts demands a 
commonly desired goal in the education of teachers, a sense of shared responsibility, an 
acknowledgment of shared expertise, the "creation of a climate of mutual trust and 


cooperation, and a willingness to break with tradition by combining and reorganizing existing 
resources" (Mills 1984, pp. 22-23).
Conclusion. Although we have pointed out both strengths and shortcomings from 
our preliminary findings, over the next year and a half as we continue our research, we hope 
to provide further and more detailed evidence of the success of efforts in which teacher 
educators are currently engaged. In particular, little is actually known about the lived reality 
of teacher educators in attempting to address diversity with their students or about how 
teacher candidates interpret and give meaning to attempts to influence them in particular 
ways. Although the faculty in our case study sites and some other teacher educators 
elsewhere can demonstrate immediate influence of their efforts through prospective teachers' 
self-reports, there is no convincing evidence in the literature related to the long-term 
impact of these strategies on teachers and their practices or on teacher education 
institutions and their faculties. We hope that our observations and interviews of 
faculty, current students, and program graduates and consideration of the positive 
aspects of institutional arrangements will provide evidence pointing to directions for 
meaningful and effective program change to better prepare teachers to teach 
everyone's children. Without such change, we will continue to fail to keep our social 
contract to educate all children to high academic standards.
Research where institution-level characteristics are attached to an individual is flawed as  
well (Ethington, 1997). First, it violates the general assumption of ordinary least squares  
regression (OLS): Observations are independent of one another. Second, it assumes that  
individuals within a group are affected identically by group-level characteristics. Finally,  the  
                                                                                                                                                              1 Carnegie defines Baccalaureate Colleges—Liberal Arts as institutions that are primarily undergraduate colleges  with major emphasis on baccalaureate programs. During the period studied, they awarded at least half of their  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 10  
inclusion of group-level variables into an OLS regression equation leads to mis-estimation of  
standard errors and the wrong number of degrees of freedom, increasing the likelihood of  
committing a Type I error (indicating that something is statistically significant when it is not).
Using HLM overcomes the problems associated with unit of analysis by simultaneously  
modeling both individual and institutional effect. HLM partitions the variance between the  
institution and the student, resulting more accurate parameter estimates.  This makes it possible  
to determine what is an individual-level effect or a group-level effect. Because these effects can  
be partitioned, each can be modeled with their respective characteristics.
First, we used HLM to explore the impact of differences in student engagement in  
diversity-related activities by institutional type. In HLM, we are able to allow the intercept to  
vary, thereby partitioning the variance between the institution and the student. We then are able  
to model the average institution differences using institutional characteristics. At the institution  
level, we created dummy coded variables for the five collapsed Carnegie institutional categories  
for four-year colleges and universities: Doctoral/Research-Extensive, Doctoral/Research-

Intensive, Master’s I & II, Baccalaureate Colleges - Liberal Arts, and Baccalaureate Colleges -

General (McCormick, 2001).2 To determine whether diversity experiences of students at Liberal  
Arts Colleges differed from their counterparts at other types of institutions, Liberal Arts Colleges  
designated as the omitted group. To control for possible confounding variables we included  
several student-level variables in all of our models. Separate models were run for first-year  
students and seniors. Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for the independent variables  
included in the models.
Insert Table 1 about here  
                                                                                                                                                              baccalaureate degrees in liberal arts fields.


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 11  
In the second stage, we used hierarchical linear modeling to examine the institutional  
factors that are related to diversity and the effects of diversity experiences on student  
engagement at Liberal Arts Colleges. Again, we allowed the intercept to vary allowing us to  
determine the variance that can be attributed to individual student differences. In addition to  
student-level controls we included several institution-level controls such as sector (public,
private), urbanicity (urban, suburban, small town/rural) size (total undergraduate headcount), and  
a measure of selectivity (derived from the 2002 Barron’s College Guide). We modeled  
separately three institutional measures of different aspects of diversity. First, we tested the  
influence of structural diversity using a variable that represents the probability that a student will  
interact with a student from another race (Meyer & McIntosh, 1992).3 We call this the “diversity  
density index.” We selected this measure because it most accurately represents the amount of  
diversity on a given campus.  As Chang (1999) notes, many studies make the assumption that  
more students of color equals a more diverse student body and use the proportion of non-White  
students as their measure of structural diversity. However, this is measure is flawed because it  
does not take into account the heterogeneity of some college campuses. For example, a  
Historically Black College or University (HBCU) would be considered highly diverse given that  
nearly all of the students on campus are non-White. If our fundamental rationale for the benefits  
accrued by diversity is that students learn from those who are different from them, students at  
His may be less likely to reap such benefits. Our “diversity density” measure overcomes this  
heterogeneity problem by including all five racial/ethnic groups in an equation. If the  
                                                                                                                                                              2 Because of institution type is highly correlated with other institutional characteristics examined in this study (size,  urbanicity, sector, and selectivity), no other controls were included at level 2.  3 Diversity density index: Probability of interacting with a student of a different race was calculated using  percentages of different races on a campus : 1-(%White2 + %African American2 + %Native American2 + %Latino/a2   + %Asian Pacific American2). Source of race/ethnicity percentages was Integrated Postsecondary Data System  (IPEDS) 1998/99 enrollment data.
Despite the rhetoric to the contrary, efforts to reform U.S. teacher education to 
address cultural diversity are severely hampered by the cultural insularity of most of the 
education professorate and by the lack of commitment to cultural diversity in teacher 
education institutions (Grant 1993).
There is an old adage—teachers teach what they know—and so do teacher educators.
The correlate is that we can't teach what we don't know. Teacher education for diversity 
involves much more than the transfer of information from teacher educators to their students.
It involves the profound transformation of people and of the world views and 
assumptions that they have carried with them for their entire lives. As Nieto (1992) 
says, an important part of becoming a multicultural teacher is becoming a multicultural 
person. This kind of transformation is beyond the current capabilities of most faculties of 
teacher education in the United States, and NCATE's proposed refinements related to faculty 
composition and qualifications in particular further highlight the problems.
In addition to the limitations posed by the cultural insularity of teacher education 
faculty, there is also a general lack of broad institutional commitment to diversity in teacher 
education programs at the college and university level. The degree of institutional 
commitment to diversity is evidenced in such things as hiring practices, student recruitment 
and admission policies, and curricular programs. Making issues of diversity central to the 
intellectual life of a college or university community legitimizes efforts to educate teachers for 
diversity.
The success of any teacher education program in restructuring for diversity is largely influenced by the norms and processes of the host institution. Teacher education programs found in institutions actively committed to the inclusion of people from diverse backgrounds are more likely to succeed in addressing issues of diversity than 


those located in institutions that are insensitive to or silent on matters of cultural inclusion (Villegas 1993, p. 3) 
In our research, we have uncovered four different approaches to dealing with the 
institutional aspects of teacher education for diversity and the current limitations of most 
teacher educators to prepare teacher candidates to work with diverse students. The first is the 
active recruitment of faculty of color through the establishment of new institutional policies 
and programs like the "Madison Plan" at the University of Wisconsin—Madison and MSU 
IDEA at Michigan State University. These programs provide special incentives to 
departments, like specially funded positions, to hire qualified faculty of color.
The Association of Teacher Educators and George Mason University, also with 
funding from the U.S. Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Language Affairs, have 
been offering a series of three-day institutes across the country for school and university 
teacher educators. These institutes are designed to encourage teacher educators to give more 
explicit attention to language-related issues in the preparation of all teachers.
A fourth approach to the institutional aspects of teacher education for diversity is 
partnership agreements between predominantly white teacher education institutions and 
other colleges or universities with significant numbers of faculty and students of color or 
schools and school districts in areas with large numbers of ethnic- or linguistic-minority 
students. This approach was exemplified in the 1970s by the partnership between Louisiana 
Tech, a formerly white segregated institution, and Grambling State University, an historically 
Black institution, which shared a common geographical area (Mills 1984). Another form of 
partnership to enhance the capacity of a teacher education program to prepare teachers to 
teach diverse students is one between a teacher education program located in a predominately 
white area and K-12 schools and school districts which would provide teacher education 
students with field placements in schools serving students of color. The American Indian and 
Latino Immersion Projects coordinated by Jim Mahan at Indiana University in Bloomington 
(Mahan 1982) and the partnership between Moorhead University in Minnesota and the San 
Juan-Alamo School District in South Texas (Cooper, Beare, and Thorman 1990) are 
examples of these school-university partnerships.


Promising Approaches: A Cautionary Note 
Although these four approaches to the institutional dimension of the task of teacher 
education for diversity all have some promise in their own right and in specifically addressing 
the proposed NCATE refinements in standards related to multicultural education, they all 
have their particular problems. The recruitment and retention of faculty of color in 
largely white institutions is both a critical need and a moral responsibility, but 
opportunities for such practices are clearly limited. Despite specific institutional policies 
to recruit faculty of color, higher education in the U. S. is currently subject to severe financial 
restrictions, and recruitment of any new faculty is the subject of intense scrutiny.
In addition, white institutions with few faculty of color often offer little more than 
inhospitable environments for new faculty of color and especially for those who come with 
expressed commitments to address issues of diversity. There is often the assumption that 
issues of diversity should be "their" concern and not the concern of the entire faculty. There is 
also the perception that faculty of color have few, if any, "mainstream" interests and are often 
automatically relegated to limited roles and responsibilities in ed schools, finding themselves 
marginalized at best. While seemingly well-intended, many of these recruitment policies fail to 
provide opportunities for all faculty to learn from the variety of perspectives on a number of 
educational issues which faculty of color bring to white institutions.
Further, the practice of teacher education is not highly valued within academe 
generally, and most college and university norms and reward structures neither reward 
teaching nor provide the kind of incentives needed to sustain programmatic efforts of faculty 
to bring about the kind of personal and professional transformation of teacher education 
students needed (Liston and Zeichner 1991). Promotion and tenure decisions still depend 
heavily on criteria related to research and scholarship, and faculty who devote large amounts 
of their time to teaching and teacher education program development have little time to spend 
on activities which are necessary for academic success. Some of these same problems point to 
shortcomings in the staff development approach which exports a small group of faculty to 
another location and then returns them to an unchanged environment in which they are 
expected to shoulder the burden for teacher education for diversity. Without a concerted 
effort to create a culturally diverse learning community and programmatic and personnel 
practices committed to the promotion of diversity and equity in all parts of the programs and 


the culture within the teacher education institution, there is little hope for widespread success 
of either of these two approaches.

The British Journal of Sociology 2006 Volume 57 Issue 1 
Szerszynski and Urry (Department of Sociology, Lancaster University) (Corresponding author email: bron@lancaster.ac.uk) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 ISSN 0007-1315 print/1468-4446 online. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA on behalf of the LSE. DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-4446.2006.00096.x 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan: inhabiting the world from afar 
Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry1 
Abstract 
In earlier publications based on the research discussed in this article (e.g. Szerszynski and Urry 2002), we argued that an emergent culture of cosmopolitanism, refracted into different forms amongst different social groups, was being nurtured by a widespread ‘banal globalism’ – a proliferation of global symbols and narratives made available through the media and popular culture. In the current article we draw on this and other empirical research to explore the relationship between visuality, mobility and cosmopolitanism. First we describe the multiple forms of mobility that expand people’s awareness of the wider world and their capacity to compare different places. We then chart the changing role that visuality has played in citizenship throughout history, noting that citizenship also involves a transformation of vision, an absenting from particular contexts and interests. We explore one particular version of that transformation – seeing the world from afar, especially in the form of images of the earth seen from space – noting how such images conventionally connote both power and alienation. We then draw on another research project, on place and vision, to argue that the shift to a cosmopolitan relationship with place means that humans increasingly inhabit their world only at a distance.
Keywords: Cosmopolitanism, mobility, visuality, media, dwelling, place, cartographic citizenship 
William Wordsworth’s The Brother ‘signifies the beginning of modernity . . . a time when one stops belonging to a culture and can only tour it’. (Buzard 1993: 27) 
The need for a constantly changing market chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It must settle everywhere, establish connections everywhere . . . the bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a  cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country . . . The individual creations of individual nations become common property. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and more impossible. (Marx and Engels 1952 [1848]: 46–7; emphasis added) 


Electric circuitry has overthrown the regime of ‘time’ and ‘space’ and pours upon us instantly and continuously the concerns of all other men [sic]. (McLuhan and Fiore 1967: 16).
Introduction 
In an earlier paper (Szerszynski and Urry 2002) we argued that there were signs of an emergent, spatially dispersed culture of cosmopolitanism, and one that is likely to have significant consequences for economic, social and political relations around the world in the twenty first century. In so doing we were contributing to a growing literature (e.g. Cheah and Robbins 1998; Köhler, Held and Archibugi 1998; Vertovec and Cohen 2002a) that had been exploring cosmopolitanism in a variety of different ways – theoretically, normatively, but also, increasingly, empirically. In that article we drew extensively on our own qualitative sociological research, carried out in the UK between 1996  and 1999, in order to try to give a richer account of both the various forms that contemporary cosmopolitanism is taking, and the social and technical processes and transformations that seem to underlie its emergence.
The more recent literature on cosmopolitanism has emphasized the multiple and contested nature of the concept. Vertovec and Cohen (2002b) have identified six main conceptions of the cosmopolitan: as a socio-cultural condition (see Appadurai 1996); as a philosophical or world view as in Beck’s  ‘cosmopolitan manifesto’ (1998); as a political project to build transnational institutions (see Kaldor 1996); as a political project for recognizing multiple identities (see Held 1995); as a mode of orientation to the world (see Hannerz 1990); and as a set of competences which allow one to make one’s way within other cultures and countries (see Friedman 1994). Our primary interest has been in the first of these – that is, in what Beck and Sznaider in their introduction to this special issue call the ‘cosmopolitan condition’ (2006: 1–23) – and we continue this focus in the current article, exploring questions such as: what are the conditions of existence of this socio-cultural condition? What is the impact of multiple mobilities on how the world is ‘seen’ and ‘lived within’?
Question #3 focuses directly on teachers’ articulation of possible constraints and other factors influencing instructional emphasis on the NOS. This focus represents a significant extension of prior efforts in this line of research.
METHOD Participants 
Fourteen preservice science teachers, nine male and five female, all of whom were white, participated in the study. Participants were enrolled in a fifth year, master of arts in teaching (MAT) teacher preparation program in a rural, midsized state university and were seeking certification in secondary level science. All participants had earned BS degrees and seven had earned MS degrees in their disciplines prior to joining the program. During the year-long program the preservice teachers were involved in several campus-based university courses and school-based teaching internships.
Context The context within which this investigation was conducted is useful for interpreting the findings.
Consequently, before describing the specifics of the research procedures, a discussion of the MAT program and its courses will be provided.
Preservice teachers proceed to the MAT program as a cohort. The program begins during the summer term with courses in educational psychology, foundations of education, legal and multicultural issues in education, instructional technology, science methods (part I), and science pedagogy. It is during the first science methods course and the science pedagogy course that students are initially exposed to the NOS. During the fall term, preservice teachers complete a part-time, field-based internship (20 hours per week), and coursework in teaching and learning, science methods (part II), microteaching, and science subject matter. The heaviest emphasis on the NOS is included within the second science methods course. During the winter term, preservice teachers complete a full-time (12-week) internship in a school setting and an associated weekly seminar. Finally, during the spring term, they complete courses in counseling, curriculum, assessment, and two subject matter courses.
The program places emphasis on the NOS, its central role in the reform efforts, and its implications for teaching science in the classroom. In particular, preservice teachers are explicitly taught several aspects of the NOS using activities that can be employed with secondary level students. Consequently, while the preservice teachers are learning about the NOS, they are also experiencing a model for its classroom implementation. Preservice teachers directly experience or discuss approximately 15 different NOS activities. Detailed descriptions of these activities can be found elsewhere (Lederman & Abd-El-Khalick, in press).
Williams et al., 1976) drew directly on intellectual currents influenced by this social  
psychological tradition, such as the work of Argyle (Argyle, 1965; Argyle, 1969;  
Argyle, 1975; Argyle and Cook, 1976), Birdwhistell (Birdwhistell, 1970), and  
Mehrabian (Mehrabian, 1972) on the role of nonverbal communication in  
interpersonal interaction. For Short, Williams & Christie this theoretical foundation  
provided a lens through which interaction via teleconferencing systems and other  
media could be viewed, explained, and understood. The theoretical origins guided  
the emphasis of early social presence theories on: (a) awareness of and the  
representation of the other, (b) the medium’s capacity for social interaction and,
specifically, (c) the presence or absence of verbal or non-verbal cues in mediated  
communication.
Definitions of social presence  
While definitions of social presence vary, they cluster around key approaches  
or dimensions. See Table 1 for outline of review of social presence definitions and  
theories presented below.
Insert Table 1 here.
Non-definitional formulations of social presence    
Let us begin with examples of “un-problematic” or “non-definitional”  
approaches to social presence. Researchers in the area of presence might be little  


    
12  
surprised to find that for some social psychologists, the concept of social presence  
is defined in a simple and unproblematic manner. One can easily find recent social  
psychological studies that prominently feature social presence in their titles, but  
where social presence itself is largely under theorized (Soussignan and Schaal,
1996; Huguet, Galvaing et al., 1999). In these studies of unmediated interactions,
Chen, Andrew H. and Thomas F. Siems (2004). The Effects of Terrorism on Global Capital Markets.
European Journal of Political Economy 20(2): 349-366.
Choudhry, Taufiq (2003). September 11 and Time-Varying Beta of United States Companies. Mimeo, Bradford University School of Management.
Collier, Paul (1999). On the Economic Consequences of Civil War. Oxford Economic Papers 51: 168-183.


- 27 -

Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler (2004). Greed and Grievance in Civil War. Oxford Economic Papers, forthcoming.
Cummins, J. David and Christopher M. Lewis (2003). Catastrophic Events, Parameter Uncertainty and the Breakdown of Implicit Long-Term Contracting: The Case of Terrorism Insurance. Journal of Risk and 
Uncertainty 26(2-3): 153-178.
Understanding the typical and atypical development of PA from its origins should assist in planning strategies to support children’s learning of alternatives to physical aggression. It appears clear from our results that the majority of preschool children are learning to inhibit PA but that a minority are not. As they grow older and physically stronger, children in that minority may become important threats to their environment. The preschool years appear to be an appropriate moment to start preventing the development of chronic physical aggression.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was supported by research grants from Quebec’s FQRSC and CIQSS, from Canada’s CIHR and SSHRC, from the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, the Molson foundation, St-Justine Hospital’s Research Center and the University of Montre´al. We thank Franck Larouche (Statistics Canada) for his sustained commitment to assist us in managing the data and Danielle Forest (University of Montre´al) for her precious help with statistical analyses.
REFERENCES 
Achenbach, T. M., & Edelbrock, C. (1983). Manual for the child behavior checklist and revised child behavior profile. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry.
Archer, J., & Coˆte´, S. (2005). The development of sex differences in aggressive behavior: An evolutionary perspective. In R. E. Tremblay, W. W. Hartup & J. Archer (Eds.), Developmental origins of aggression (pp. 425–443). New York: Guilford.
Arseneault, L., Moffit, T. E., Caspi, A., Taylor, A., Rijsdijk, F. V., Jaffee, S. R., et al. (2003). Strong genetic effects on cross-situational antisocial behaviour among 5-year-old children according to mothers, teachers, examiner-observers, and twins’ self-reports. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44, 832–848.
Bandura, A. (1973). Aggression: A social learning analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
To summarize, terrorism systematically influences tourists’ choice of destination and can,
therefore, substantially negatively affect a host country. Moreover, the effect is long-

lasting and has an impact on the demand for tourism in neighboring countries. It remains 
an open question whether tourists’ reactions to the threat of terrorism are rational.
According to a RAND survey conducted in 1989, a third of those Americans interviewed 
said they would refuse the opportunity to travel abroad because of the risk of terrorism 
(Downes-Le Guin and Hoffman 1993). It is hard to think of similar precautionary 
measures against life-threatening eventualities taking place with the same likelihood.
More generally, Viscusi and Zeckhauser (2003) find that people are subject to a 
propensity to predict worst-case scenarios in assessing terrorism risks and are prone to 
anomalies known from other risk perception contexts. Similarly, Sunstein (2003) shows 
that individuals focus on the badness of the outcome rather than on the probability that it 
will occur. The “probability neglect” results in fear that greatly exceeds discounted harm.
2. Foreign direct investment (FDI). Terrorism affects the allocation decision of firms 
investing money in real foreign assets. Terrorists can quite easily attack and damage 
foreign owned firms, seriously disrupting their activities. As the foreigners have a large 
                                                   7 This is particularly important as, in studies based on time-series methods, the monthly or quarterly impacts are aggregated to assess the total impact of a terrorist incident. Hence, the plausibility of the temporal pattern needs careful attention.


- 11 -

choice of countries to invest in, even quite mild terrorist activities tend to considerably 
reduce the inflow of capital to a terror-stricken country.
ERIC NEUMAYER 397 


Threats to personal integrity stemming from events of civil and ethnic wars as well as the collapse of state authority (DOMWAR/STATEFAIL) are measured by the maximum of magnitude scores, each on a zero to four scale, as coded for such events by the U.S. State Failure Task Force Project. For civil and ethnic wars, the magnitude refers to the portion of a country affected by fighting, whereas for state failure the magnitude refers to the extent of failure of state authority (Marshall, Gurr, and Harff, 2002). In addition, we use a magnitude score measuring the annual number of deaths from genocide and politicide (GEN/POLITICIDE) from the same source.12 Genocide and politicide are defined as the calculated physical destruction of a communal or political group in whole or part. With respect to interstate war, we wondered whether the fact that existing ref-

ugee studies find this variable to be insignificant might be because of the high threshold of 1,000 battle deaths used for coding a conflict as interstate war in the commonly used Correlates of War data set (Singer, 2003). We therefore constructed a variable measuring the extent of external armed conflict (EXTERNALWAR) based on data from the Uppsala Conflict Data Project (Gleditsch, Wallensteen, Eriksson, Sollenberg, and Strand, 2002). The variable is coded as zero if there was no armed conflict on the territory of a country. It is coded as one if there was a minor armed conflict, defined as any type of armed conflict resulting in more than 25 but less than 1,000 casualties in any 1 year. The variable was coded as two if the conflict was of intermediate nature, defined as at least 25 but less than 1,000 casualties in any 1 year in addition to an accumulated total of at least 1,000 deaths. Three is the code for large conflicts, which require more than 1,000 battle deaths in a single year to qualify. Note that the reference point for coding is whether the conflict takes place on the territory of a country. A conflict is not coded for a country participating in a conflict outside its own territory as this cannot be expected to create refugees in this country. To measure the threat to people’s personal integrity coming from natural dis-

asters, we constructed a variable counting the total aggregate number of deaths from droughts, earthquakes, epidemics, extreme temperatures, insect infestations, floods, earth slides, volcano eruptions, sea waves and surges, wild fires, and wind storms (NATURALDISASTER) (CRED, 2002). To test for the effect of famines and food insecurity on asylum migration, we take the net per capita food production (FOOD), indexed with base years 1989–1991, as our proxy variable (FAO, 2003). To see whether cultural similarity is a facilitating factor lowering the costs of 
migration, we included the percentage of Christians in the country of origin (%CHRIST) (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1999). Aid and trade in percent of GDP (AID and TRADE) as well as the number of tourist arrivals (TOURISTS) in the country of origin are taken to test for whether the extent of casual contact with the outside world has a significant impact upon flows of asylum seeking (World Bank, 2001; WTO, 2002). We interpolate these data for missing years to avoid further reductions in sample size. To test for the colonial link effect, we included the number of years between 1900 
and 1960 a country has been a former colony of any European destination country (COLONY) (Alesina and Dollar, 2000). Another important facilitating factor is geographical proximity. The closer a country of origin is to Western Europe, the easier it is to reach these countries and file an asylum application. We capture this by the minimum air distance between the capital city of the country of origin and the capital city of the closest Western European country (DISTANCE) (Bennett and Stam, 2001). The presence of so-called migration networks is commonly regarded as an im-

portant facilitator (Bo¨cker, 1998). Unfortunately, we were not able to find reliable 
12 We add 0.5 to the original score to distinguish the absence of such events from the presence of such events with an annual number of deaths of less than 300.
Although most institutions included references to multicultural education in the unit's 
objectives or mission statement, NCATE evaluators were often unable to detect where these 
were implemented in the curriculum (Gollnick 1992, p. 236).
Much of the literature on efforts to educate teachers for cultural diversity is fugitive,
and some of the good work that is going on has received little public attention beyond 
program sites. Our purpose in the overall study is to make some of these exemplary 


practices more visible, to capture the voices of teacher educators who take matters of 
diversity seriously in their attempts to educate preservice teachers, and to encourage 
more thorough and widespread attention to issues of diversity in initial teacher 
education programs throughout the United States.
Over the course of our study, we have come to regard the problem of teacher 
education for diversity as one having three dimensions: (1) the problem of selection, (2) the 
problem of socialization through curriculum and instruction, and (3) the problem of changing 
the institutional environment of teacher education. We will briefly summarize our initial 
findings related to each of these three dimensions. Special attention will be given to the 
problem of institutional change in relation to the proposed NCATE refinements.
The Problem of Selection 
Much has been written in the U. S. about the growing disparity in backgrounds and 
life experiences between teachers and teacher educators, on the one hand, and public school 
students, on the other. It is clear from our work, as both researchers and teacher educators,
as well as the work of others that most prospective teachers come to teacher education with 
very little direct intercultural experience. In addition, they tend to view diversity as a problem 
rather than as a resource. They possess little knowledge about different ethnic and racial 
groups in the United States and their cultures, histories, and contributions to the making of 
the nation, and especially their records of discrimination, disenfranchisement, and suffering.
Immersive virtual environments and computer games opened a much wider  
range of potential channels for behavioral interaction. Writing in the context of VR,
Palmer’s (1995) definition of social presence builds on Heeter’s (1992) emphasis  
on reaction and interactivity. These seem to acknowledge the desire to include a  
behavioral component in the definition. For Palmer, the definition of social presence  
includes “effectively negotiate(ing) a relationship through an interdependent, multi-

channel exchange of behaviors” (Palmer, 1995, p. 291).
Measures of Social Presence   
Measures are born of the conceptualizations of social presence. While various  
measures have been proposed for various conceptualizations, there is as of yet no  
widely accepted measure of social presence. In our analysis below, we suggest that  


    
20  
a more robust definition and explication of social presence may be required to  
support the development of a measure that has satisfactory content and construct  
validity. See Table 2.
Insert Table 2 here.
Subjective self-report measures: Subjective social richness of the medium   
Because Short, Williams & Christie (1976) popularized the use of the term  
social presence in telecommunication, theirs is the most commonly used measure  
of social presence. They use a self-report measure of “the subjective quality of the  
communications medium” (p. 65) to measure social presence. Their approach uses  
a set of semantic differential scales that seek to tap into some of the social and  
emotional capabilities of the medium. It is important to note that users are not  
asked to judge the experience of the other, but to indirectly assess the effect the  
medium. The use of indicators that ask the respondent to assess the “experience”,
rather than the “medium”, is more typical of presence measures. Rather, in this  
measure the respondent is asked to directly pass judgment on the medium itself.
RESULTS 
We documented 2441 incident breast cancer cases. Women who had never worked on rotating night shifts accounted for 40.4% of the person-years of followup, those who worked for 1–14 years on shifts accounted for 52.2%, those who worked for 15–29 years accounted for 5.6%, and those who worked for 30 or more years accounted for 1.8%. Women who had ever worked on rotating shifts were similar in their baseline characteristics to those who had not. However, there were slightly fewer women who had not given birth among the never night shift workers, and they tended to be somewhat leaner (Table 1). Night shift workers were older and thus more likely to be postmenopausal than those who had never worked on rotating night shifts.
Table 2 shows the relationship between total years on rotating night shifts and breast cancer. Higher duration of working shiftwork was modestly associated with an increased breast cancer risk (P 
trend ? .02). Women who had worked 30 
or more years on rotating night shifts had a 36% greater risk of breast cancer compared with never workers (multivariate-adjusted RR ? 1.36; 95% CI ? 1.04 to 1.78).
In analyses stratified by menopausal status, the relation of duration of night work and breast cancer was slightly different in premenopausal and postmenopausal women (Table 3). Among postmenopausal women, we observed an association in the highest (?30 years) shift group (multivariate-adjusted RR ? 1.36; 95% CI ? 1.04 to 1.78), and the test for trend was statistically significant (P ? .05). Similarly, we observed an increased breast cancer risk for the highest shift group (?20 years) of premenopausal women (RR ? 1.66; 95% CI ? 0.81 to 3.40) but also a modest association (RR ? 1.23; 95% CI ? 0.97 to 1.55) among those who had worked 1–14 years on rotating night shifts (Table 3): more specifically, those who worked only 1–2 years on rotating night shifts (data not shown). The trend was not statistically significant (P ? .12).
1564 REPORTS Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 93, No. 20, October 17, 2001 
 by guest on M ay 7, 2013 
http://jnci.oxfordjournals.org/ D 
ow nloaded from 
  



Night work was only weakly associated with physical activity, region, and dietary variables such as lifetime alcohol consumption. However, to address the possibility that these variables could account for the observed relation between shiftwork and breast cancer, we conducted additional analyses, including 
these variables as well as the nurses’ and their husband’s educational levels (as markers of socioeconomic status) in our multiple logistic regression models. We did not include them in the final model because they did not alter our estimates (data not shown). Because of the observed age difference between ever and never 
rotating night shift workers, we modeled subsequent analyses with age as a continuous variable and by 2-year categories. However, modeling age in different ways did not lead to substantial changes in the estimates of the RR.
We attempted to explain the slight differences in the association of shiftwork duration and breast cancer risk between premenopausal and postmenopausal women by examining whether the effects of shiftwork varied in specific subgroups. Because hormone receptor-positive tumors are more likely to be found in older women (39), we examined breast cancers according to their hormonal receptor status and conducted further analyses for premenopausal and postmenopausal women separately. As with total breast cancer, for the estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer case subjects, longer duration in rotating night shifts was associated with a moderate increase in risk, particularly for premenopausal women, and we observed slightly elevated risks with shorter durations of shiftwork. The risk of hormone receptor-negative breast cancer was not elevated after 30 or more years of rotating night shifts (data not shown). DISCUSSION 
In this large and, to our knowledge, first prospective cohort study of shiftwork 
Table 1. Age and age-standardized* characteristics according to rotating shiftwork status in 1988 among 78 562 women in the Nurses’ Health Study 
Characteristic 
Value of indicated characteristic by years worked on rotating night shifts 
Never (n ? 31 761) 
1–14 y (n ? 40 993) 
15–29 (n ? 4426) 
>30 y (n ? 1382) 
Mean age, y (SD)† 54.3 (7.2) 54.7 (7.1) 56.1 (6.9) 60.4 (4.6) Menarche before age 12 y, % 21.8 22.8 23.3 26.3 Nulliparous, % 5.7 7.3 6.8 5.6 Parity ?5 children, % 14.5 13.4 16.2 13.9 Age at first birth ?30 y, %‡ 6.9 9.0 8.0 7.4 First-degree family history of breast cancer, % 11 11 11 12 History of benign breast disease, % 37 38 34 29 Ever use oral contraceptives, % 48.5 48.4 44.4 41.1 Postmenopausal in 1988, % 71.1 71.7 75.5 82.8 Mean age at menopause, y (SD)† 46.3 (6.6) 46.3 (6.7) 46.0 (6.7) 47.0 (6.6) Age at menopause ?55 y, %§ 4.6 4.6 3.8 5.2 Current PMH? use ?5 y, % 10.9 11.3 9.9 9.1 BMI¶ in 1988 ?25, % 40.1 42.6 52.5 42.7 BMI¶ at age 18 y ?25, % 26.6 27.9 33.3 25.8 Weight change >10 kg, age 18 y to menopause, %§ 15.6 15.9 20.9 18.5 Mean current alcohol consumption, g/day (SD)† 6.3 (11.01) 6.5 (11.1) 5.5 (11.2) 5.7 (11.0) Mean height in inches (SD)† 64.4 (3.2) 64.5 (3.3) 64.4 (3.0) 64.2 (3.6) Socioeconomic status (husband’s education beyond high school), % 41.8 42.2 29.5 28.4 Nurse’s education higher than a bachelor’s degree, % 9.2 9.2 5.6 2.6 
*Age standardized according to eight categories of age (<44, 45–49, 50–54, 55–59, 60–64, 65–69, 70–74, and?75 years) as of the 2-year period when participants first entered follow-up. †SD ? standard deviation. ‡Among the parous women only. §Among the postmenopausal women only. ?PMH ? postmenopausal hormone. ¶BMI ? body mass index.
Nevertheless, we have also been concerned to explore how this sociocultural condition might also involve particular intellectual and aesthetic  orientations towards cultural and geographical difference, and distinctive kinds of competence. Thus, in our earlier article (Szerszynski and Urry 2002: 470), we argued that cosmopolitanism involves a kind of connoisseurship, of places, people, and cultures. Cosmopolitan predispositions and practices, we suggested, involve some or all of: 
• extensive mobility, in which people have the right to ‘travel’ corporeally, imaginatively and virtually, and for significant numbers also the means to so travel; 
114 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


• the capacity to consume many places and environments en route; • a curiosity about many places, peoples and cultures, and at least a rudi-

mentary ability to locate such places and cultures historically, geographically and anthropologically; 
• a willingness to take risks by virtue of encountering the ‘other’; • an ability to ‘map’ one’s own society and its culture in terms of a histor-

ical and geographical knowledge, to have some ability to reflect upon and judge aesthetically between different natures, places and societies; 
• the semiotic skill to be able to interpret images of various others, to see what they are meant to represent, and to know when they are ironic; and 
• an openness to other peoples and cultures and a willingness/ability to appreciate some elements of the language or culture of the ‘other’.
It is important to stress that not all of the features of what Beck and Sznaider (2006: 1–23) call ‘really-existing cosmopolitanization’ are likely to be progressive. For example, some of the more sociological literature on cosmopolitanism has drawn attention to the inequalities between ‘cosmopolitans’ and the ‘rest’; and of course this is only a subset of the more general ways in which multiple mobilities can generate novel, extensive and elaborate forms of social inequality (see Cass, Shove and Urry 2005).2 However, our concerns in this paper are rather different; we are concerned here with deciphering the complex entanglements of cosmopolitanism with the visual, with mobilities, and with changing forms of ‘being-in-the-world’. If a system of cosmopolitanism is our destiny whether we like it or not, we need to work at what are its implications. And, we want to suggest, one of the more subtle but highly significant implications of the cosmopolitan condition is the way that growing numbers of humans might now be said to ‘inhabit’ their world at a distance.
In the current paper we thus explore the importance of the visual and of mobility in the formation of a culture of cosmopolitan citizenship. We seek to ground the analysis of cosmopolitanism in a theoretically informed analysis of place, vision and movement. We examine how such a citizenship involves a transformation of vision, one that relies on the removal of the self from immediate everyday engagement in the world. We examine the role of multiple mobilities involved in this process of seeing the world from afar, through a cartographic visuality. Is what we might call a cartographic citizenship part of the culture of cosmopolitanism in which many humans are now implicated? What implication might this have for politics and social life?
Multiple mobilities 
Three kinds of ‘travel’ are particularly significant in creating the conditions for a cosmopolitan mode of being-in-the-world: physical, bodily travel, which has 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 115 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


become a ‘way of life’ for many in Western societies; imaginative travel, to be transported elsewhere through the images of places and peoples encountered in the media; and virtual travel, transcending geographical and often social distance through information and communications technology (see Urry 2000: ch. 3).
At one level it seems obvious that knowing the distinctiveness of a place must be to know it better, to ‘dwell’ more fully in place. Yet the findings of this project illustrated a tension here. In order to illustrate this we focus on two of the focus groups held in February 1999. For the first, held in a small, affluent rural village close to the Lake District National Park in the central part of the coastal strip, we recruited professional residents. The second focus group was held in a medium-sized, inland ex-mining village with high levels of unemployment and social deprivation, and was made up of mothers in their 30s from ‘under-employed’ families living in social housing. As might have been expected, the first group were far more mobile in terms of distance and frequency of travel, in their history of residence as well as in work and leisure, and had experienced higher levels of education. Most had moved to West Cumbria from elsewhere in the country for employment reasons, but also cited landscape character as a reason for remaining in the area. The working-class women had almost all been born in the area and said they remained because of family reasons as well as the lack of opportunity to move. Their loyalty to their village was compromised by a sense of growing social problems, especially drugs and petty crime.
The two groups had very different ways of talking about the distinctiveness of their local area. The professional group talked about landscape character in ways similar to those adopted by the Countryside Commission and other official bodies (see, for example, Countryside Commission 1998; Countryside Commission and English Nature 1996). When asked to imagine a photograph they might take of the area, they chose characteristically ‘scenic’ images. In a photograph-sorting exercise, and in their general conversation, they readily abstracted out visual properties of landscape, talked about places by 
124 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


comparing and contrasting them with other places, and did so in a way which abstracted the visual appearance of a place from the people who lived  there.
By contrast, the imaginary photographs chosen by the working-class women were attempts to invoke personal memories and associations, for example through an image of the steps on which they all played as children. Their village was not a point in space which happened to possess a certain combination of characteristics; it was simply their village, their ‘home’. Their comparative talk about the village was more temporal than spatial, comparing life in the village today with that of the past, using narratives of increasing mobility, loss of community and decline of social mores. Moreover, when the women did talk about their own and other localities in terms of characteristics, these were rendered more in practical than visual terms. They could compare in great detail the kind of housing that was available in different villages nearby, but made little mention of how their area compared visually with anywhere else. Their response to the sorting exercise was to classify the photographs in terms of whether the places shown would be nice locations to have a house. They conceived of the outdoors as a domestic, social space, to be judged by the character of its people and its social relations, and by the practical  benefits that it did or did not offer – as a ‘taskscape’ rather than a ‘landscape’ (Ingold 2000: 195).
If anything, the professional group made more use of the outdoors; but they favoured activities that depend on the visual properties of landscape, such as walking, bird watching, mountain biking, fishing and diving. The working-class women’s use of the surrounding countryside was more tightly focused on  practical (dog-walking, walking to school, rabbit-catching) or social activities (camping, picnicking). Their discussion of possible new woodlands made little mention of the visual properties of trees, concentrating instead on the new risks to children that wooded areas might bring. They preferred any available land to be used for new housing or sports facilities rather than woodland.
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe390 


(Neumayer, 2004). Little has been done to deal with the reasons why people seek asylum in the first place. Only very recently have Western European countries considered ways to reduce migration pressure more seriously by solving the causes of asylum migration rather than by merely keeping out unwanted asylum seekers from their borders (European Council, 1999, 2002). To engage in such policies more effectively, one must first of all know what the major determinants of asylum migration are. This article will identify the major determinants and thus provide guidance on which policies are needed to address the root causes of asylum migration. This article provides the first comprehensive quantitative analysis of the causes of 
asylum migration to Western Europe. Existing studies mainly address refugees crossing national boundaries and internally displaced persons (IDPs), the majority of whom are located in developing countries.3 A specific focus on asylum seeking in developed countries can be justified on a number of grounds. To start with, the rising number of migrants asking for asylum in developed countries, rather than the much higher number of refugees in developing countries, has caught the attention of the public, media, and policymakers alike and has resulted in various defensive policy measures aimed at reducing these numbers. Quantitative studies of the causes of refugee and IDP flows in developing countries suggest that human rights abuses and generalized political violence are important causes for refugee flight, but are they also causes of asylum seeking in developed countries? Given that asylum seekers in developed countries make up less than 30 percent of worldwide refugees and IDPs (UNHCR, 2002), and are typically excluded from many refugee studies,4 it is unclear whether the same causes drive both phenomena. A priori, there might be good reasons to presume that the causes will be different. Indeed, the popular perception is that asylum seekers are mainly economic migrants and therefore ‘‘bogus’’ rather than ‘‘genuine’’ refugees.
Theoretical Considerations: What Makes People Seek Asylum?
Much of the existing literature on the determinants of asylum seeking, or of migration more generally, distinguishes between factors pushing people out of their country of origin and factors pulling people toward the country of destination (see, e.g., Schoorl, 2000). Following Moore and Shellman (2003), we will conceptualize the decision to lodge an application for asylum more directly as a consequence of utility-optimizing behavior. An individual weighs the costs of staying in his/her country of origin versus the costs of migrating to the country of destination.5 If the costs of staying exceed the costs of migrating, then the individual, or in some cases the whole family, will decide to migrate and file an application for asylum. It is likely that this decision making by asylum seekers is influenced by a complex range of mutually non-exclusive factors. Because of space limitations, we can only sketch these factors here. Before looking at these factors, it is important that our conceptualization should 
not be misinterpreted. The decision to migrate might well be undertaken under time and other pressures, but even in these cases a decision to leave the country is in effect taken.6 We therefore also draw on insights from the general literature on voluntary migration,7 fully aware that sometimes asylum seekers will have fled their 
3 See, for example, Schmeidl (1997), Davenport, Steven, Moore, and Poe (2003), Moore and Shellman (2003). 4 For example, Gibney, Apodaca, and McCann (1996), Schmeidl (1997), Apodaca (1998). 5 Theorists of voluntary migration typically model migration within a benefit–cost framework. The two frame-

works are fully compatible since the benefits of migration are nothing else but the opportunity costs of staying. 6 Things are different where people are actively forced out of their country against their will, that is, in spite of 
their decision to stay, but these are likely to cover a small minority of cases only. 7 As reviewed in, for example, Massey et al. (1993) and Borjas (1994).


Note 
1. While our focus is mainly on the preparation of white teachers to teach poor students of color because of demographic characteristics, we are not assuming that teachers who are members of a minority group can necessarily translate their cultural knowledge into culturally relevant pedagogy (Montecinos, in press). We are also not saying that it is unimportant to continue to try to recruit more people of color into teaching. These efforts are extremely important, but even under the most optimistic scenario for their success, the problem of educating teachers for diversity in the United States will largely continue to be one of educating culturally encapsulated and monolingual white teachers to teach many poor students of color. Finally, we are also not saying that multicultural education and culturally responsive teaching is only important for poor students of color. Multicultural education, culturally responsive pedagogy, and the intercultural competence of teachers are important issues in all schools and for all teachers. Our study focuses on a small aspect of a much larger issue.


References 
Ahlquist, R. 1992. Manifestations of inequality: Overcoming resistance in a multicultural foundations course. In Research and multicultural education (89-105). Edited by C. Grant. London: Falmer Press.
Beyer, L. 1991. Teacher education, reflective inquiry and moral action. In Issues and practices in inquiry-oriented teacher education (113-29). Edited by B. R. Tabachnick and K. Zeichner. Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Bok, D. 1986. Higher learning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cooper, A., P. Beare, and J. Thorman. 1990. Preparing teachers for diversity: A comparison of student teaching experiences in Minnesota & South Texas. Action in Teacher Education 12(3): 1-4.
Ducharme, E., and R. Agne. 1989. Professors of education: Uneasy residents of academe. In The professors of teaching (67-86). Edited by R. Wisniewski and E. Ducharme. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
all of the model reliabilities are quite high (none are below .6), which suggests that using  
multilevel modeling to estimate the intercepts is appropriate (Kreft & Leeuw, 1998). Second, if  
we attempt to model group-level effects with OLS by attaching institutional characteristics to  
individuals, we will not accurately capture the effect of these characteristics and will misestimate  
their standard errors (Ethington, 1997).
Another limitation is related to the validity of self-reported gains. As Pascarella (2001)  
and others point out, gain scores may be confounded by students’ entering characteristics.
However, Pike (1999) provides some evidence to suggest that gain scores are not significantly  
related to entering ability. Although the concerns about self-reported data are legitimate, the  
gains measures are only one of several sets of dependent variables used in this study.  In  
addition, because of ceiling effects we might expect the self-reported gains of students at liberal  
arts colleges, many of which employ more selective admissions standards, to be smaller overall  
than students at master’s granting and baccalaureate general colleges.  That is, students at the  
latter types of schools may start college at lower levels of intellectual and personal development  
and have more room to move upward on the self-report gains measures.  Inasmuch as the pattern  
of results overwhelmingly favor liberal arts colleges, the concerns about the validity of self-

reported gains should be interpreted in the context of the complete set of findings.
Our results should also be considered in light of possible inadequacies in the 2000  
Carnegie Classification scheme. Some might argue that the system is so diverse even within  
categories in the characteristics of institutions that the categories themselves have little meaning.
While we recognize such limitations, the Carnegie Classification is the most recent and best  
know way to categorize colleges and universities.


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 17  
Additionally, some of the effect sizes are relatively small. In particular, some of the  
effects of the institutional diversity measures for liberal arts colleges are trivial.  Even so, the  
pattern of the effect sizes and the magnitude of other effect sizes favoring liberal arts colleges  
cannot be overlooked.
04 (1.
02 ) 
G irl 
s 51 
9, 1.
20 (1.
01 ) 
50 9,
0. 99 
(0. 92 
) 48 
7, 0.
80 (0.
Broken windows revisited 
Overall, the findings did not support the thesis that disorder directly causes crime. First, although it is true that where survey-reported violence was high, levels of disorder detected by SSO tended to be high, the relationship was not strong. Second—and more important—is the finding, noted above, that the level of disorder varied strongly with neighborhood structural characteristics, poverty among them. Once these characteristics and collective efficacy were taken into account, the connection between disorder and crime vanished in most instances. Homicide, arguably one of the best measures of violence, was among the offenses for which there was no direct relationship with disorder.
The implication is that disorder and crime have similar roots: The forces that generate disorder also generate crime. It is the structural characteristics of neighborhoods, as well as neighborhood cohesion and informal social control—not levels of disorder—that most affect crime. Where collective efficacy was strong, rates of violence were low regardless of sociodemographic composition and observed disorder. Levels of homicide and burglary were affected by the amount of poverty and the strength of collective efficacy. Immigrant concentration also affected crime: In neighborhoods where immigrants were concentrated, crime victimization levels (as reported by the survey) tended to be higher. What is more, disorder did not act as a mediator between neighborhood structural characteristics and predatory crime.
4 
R  e  s  e  a  r  c  h    i  n    B  r  i  e  f   


“Broken Windows” and Police Discretion, by George L. Kelling (Research Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, October 1999, NCJ 178259).
“Crime Control, the Police, and Culture Wars: Broken Windows and Cultural Pluralism,” by George L. Kelling, in Perspectives on Crime and Justice: 1997–1998 Lecture Series (Research Forum, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, November 1998, NCJ 172851): 1–28.
Crime, Grime, Fear, and Decline: A Longitudinal Look, by Ralph B. Taylor (Research in Brief, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, July 1999, NCJ 177603).
“The Incivilities Thesis: Theory, Measurement, and Policy,” by Ralph B. Taylor, in Measuring What Matters: Proceedings From the Police Research Institute Meetings, ed. Robert H. Langworthy (Research Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice and Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, July 1999, NCJ 170610): 65–88.
ERIC NEUMAYER 391 


country under imminent threat to their own personal integrity or that of their family.
The Costs of Staying 
As concerns socioeconomic factors, the traditional neoclassical economic approach to migration emphasizes the importance of the relative difference in wage rates and rate of return to human capital in the destination and countries of origin as decisive factors in the international migration decision (Bauer and Zimmermann, 1994). Poor living standards and employment opportunities in the country of origin make it more attractive to seek improvement of one’s economic fortune abroad. They raise the benefits of migration and therefore the opportunity costs of staying behind. Human capital economic theory also predicts that people of working age are most likely to migrate as they have a higher chance to increase their living standards than others (Massey, Arango, Hugo, Kouaouci, Pellegrino, and Taylor, 1993; Borjas, 1994). Importantly, migration that is mainly determined by an economic calculus might become channeled into asylum migration if other legal channels of migration become shut. This happened in the late 1960s and 1970s when legal economic migration and family reunification with existing migrants became severely restricted in many Western European countries. Oppressive political conditions raise the costs of staying for all individuals, except 
those forming part of the oppressing political elite. Restrictions on the freedom to associate, to assemble, to voice dissident political opinions, and to compete for political office can therefore be expected to be positively associated with asylum flows. The same holds true for any form of threat to the personal integrity of individuals. This threat could come from various sources. It could come from the government or government-controlled agencies in the form of human rights violations and the killing of political dissidents. A threat could also come from dissident groups, however, who use violence in their attempt to overthrow the existing political regime. In most cases, there will be a combination of threats from both government and dissident sides, most clearly visible in periods of civil war, often facilitated and spurred by foreign policies of external parties. The threat can also come from another country in the case of an interstate war. Lastly, geography reminds us that threats to one’s personal integrity can also come from the exposure of human beings to natural disasters such as earthquakes, floods, and the like. The same is true for famines, which are often a consequence of the combination of adverse natural conditions with violent political conflict. Quite clearly, threats to one’s personal integrity significantly raise the costs of staying. Also, threats to personal integrity can go hand-in-hand with damage to the economic opportunities of affected individuals, thus reinforcing the socioeconomic factors influencing the decision making.
The Costs of Migration 
The costs of migration are normally high given that one leaves one’s familiar surroundings and culture and then needs to adapt to new living conditions, possibly a new language, and a different culture in the country of destination, where the existing population might view immigrants with suspicion and hostility. As The Economist (2002:6) has put it, ‘‘Leaving one’s home to settle in a foreign land requires courage or desperation.’’ If only for this reason, most people stay put rather than leave their country of origin. In addition, there are also the direct costs of migration in the form of transportation and information costs. Since fewer people in very impoverished countries will have the resources available to finance their migration, it is widely suggested that the effect of the level of economic development on migration could be bell shaped, often referred to as a ‘‘migration hump’’ 
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe392 


(see, e.g., Vogler and Rotte, 2000; Holzer, Schneider, and Casey, 2002; Boswell, 2003). Great poverty might impede migration, and little poverty takes away the incentives for migration. A similar argument can be made with respect to the political regime in the source country. Democratic countries restrict the entry, but rarely the exit, of citizens, whereas harsh autocracies often impose limitations on leaving the country. The effect of autocracy on migration might therefore be bell shaped as well. In harsh autocracies, leaving the country is difficult, whereas full democracy takes away one incentive to leave. More generally, factors that facilitate the transition from one country to another 
will lower the costs of migration and therefore be associated with higher asylum flows. For example, cultural and religious similarity helps to reduce the costs of adjusting to the new country of destination. Similarly, the systems approach suggests that existing links and personal contacts between destination countries and the country of origin might also facilitate migration as they make individuals more familiar with the other country. Higher inflows of aid, trade, or tourism might enhance such contacts (Bilsborrow and Zlotnik, 1994). Individuals from countries of origin that were colonized by Western developed countries in the past might face lower costs of migration to these countries (Robinson and Segrott, 2002). This is because the former colonial power’s language is often spoken in the former colony as well. In addition, there are often long-term residents from former colonies living in the destination country who can help in finding jobs and who can provide some cushioning of the cultural shock linked to migration to a foreign country. Similarly, according to the network theory, a higher number of past asylum 
seekers from a particular country of origin lowers the costs of migration for those left behind (Massey et al., 1993; Koser and Pinkerton, 2002; Robinson and Segrott, 2002). This is because positive examples have been set that migration can be carried out, and more or less dubious businesses will have evolved to help in getting visas or arranging for transportation (traffickers). In addition, already existing asylum seekers might help newcomers in finding their way in the country of destination and in the search for employment. Immigrants tend to cluster spatially in order to lower the costs of migration. Destination countries often try to prevent such clustering without much success. Geographical proximity will also lower the costs of migration as boats or land 
transport can be used, whereas great geographical distance to the country of destination raises the costs of migration as air transport is required. Since most refugees do not have the means to overcome great geographical distances, they become IDPs, or refugees in neighboring developing countries rather than asylum seekers in the developed world. Finally, generous welfare provisions for asylum seekers lower the costs of mi-

gration (Robinson and Segrott, 2002). Conversely, deterring measures such as restrictions on welfare benefits and working rights, the risk of one’s application becoming rejected because of low recognition rates, limited appeal opportunities, and the threat of forced removal all raise the costs of migration. Developed countries have gone a long way over the last decade or so to raise these costs of migration. Ironically, this has meant that asylum seekers have resorted more to the help provided by traffickers (Koser, 2000), which is then regarded with great suspicion in the destination country (UNHCR, 2000). In addition, developed countries have also taken measures to prevent individuals from lodging asylum applications in the first place in the form of visa restrictions, sanctions against airlines bringing in passengers without valid visas, and the like (Bo¨cker and Havinga, 1998; Havinga and Bo¨cker, 1999; Noll, 2000; Schuster, 2000). They have not been worried by the fact that many of these restrictions indiscriminately raise the costs of migration for ‘‘genuine’’ refugees and for those in search of improved economic living conditions, even though the measures are usually justified by the perceived need to deter only the latter (Steiner, 1999; Gibney, 2000).
Since the conflict observations display sensitive input-input and input-output effects, this 
sensitivity becomes key to understanding and predicting the likelihood of conflicts in the 
international context.  Feeding the neural network with an unbalanced training set, heavily 
loaded with non-conflict dyads, runs the risk of over-emphasizing a single output pattern (non-

conflict).  The network, in this case, is not exposed to all the possible input-output effects stored 
in the databases.  As a result, the internal model constructed by the neural network during the 
training will be only partially representative of the much more complex “causal” model 
embedded in the data and so will be unable to generalize (Garson 1998: 87).
Another important contributor to poor classification performance in neural network 
models with unbalanced training sets derives from how the backpropagation algorithm works.
As explained above, backpropagation is achieved in neural networks by an iterative process, as 
the network repeatedly tries to learn the correct output for each training pattern.  During this 
learning phase, the weights are modified on the basis of error signals generated from the output 
learnt by the network.  Thus if the majority of the outputs used in the learning process belong to 
one class (non-conflict), the error minimization process will concentrate overwhelmingly on that 
class.  The less frequent value of the output (dispute) will account for only minor changes in the 
network’s weights.  This negative process would be further strengthened by the fact that neural 
networks do not have a linear response to the input and are less sensitive to outliers (Schrodt 
1991: 372).  Indeed, the non-linear functions used by the network to model the input-output 


12 
relation have the effect of “squeezing” the values of the data in the training set, especially at the 
high and low ends of the data range, thus reducing the effect of outliers.  Consequently,
incidences of dispute, which are the outliers in the conflict data, will not produce dramatic 
change in the network’s internal model even if the input-output effect that they reproduce is quite 
large.10  Because few changes in the weight values are determined by the dispute output, and 
because of the non-linear impact of the dispute dyads on the neural network’s weights, the 
learning process in the backpropagation algorithm will be biased toward the modal values of the 
training set.  Unless care is taken to construct training sets with a more balanced representation 
of the two output classes, the neural network models will be less useful in predicting rare events.
One obvious way to avoid an inadequate information flow to the network and an error 
minimization process that is biased towards the modal value is to adopt an endogenous stratified 
sampling for the training set, which is also known as choice-based or case-control design.11  This 
sampling strategy focuses on selection within the range of the dependent variable.  A predefined 
number of observations, for which the dependent variable is equal to one, is randomly selected.
The same number of cases is also randomly chosen from all the observations with output equal to 
zero (the control), perfectly equalizing the two outputs in the training set.  A perfectly balanced 
training set alone does not, however, provide the optimal solution.  Selecting on the dependent 
variable is widely recognized as a possible source of biased conclusions.12  A correction 
mechanism should be used, together with the balanced approach, so as to avoid biases that will 
produce the opposite effect of the unbalanced training set.
gods, etc.)   
Because the social presence of the other is mediated by telecommunication  
technology, it might be more accurately described as mediated social presence or  
social telepresence. In keeping with tradition in this area (Short, Williams et al.,
1976; Heeter, 1992; Palmer, 1995) we will use the label “social presence”  
specifically to mean interactions in mediated environments, even though the phrase  
also applies to non-mediated interactions (Soussignan and Schaal, 1996; Huguet,
Galvaing et al., 1999).
The problems of how to define, measure, and control levels of physical  
presence and social presence via interface design have become both challenging  
and practical problems in communication theory (Palmer, 1995; Lauria, 1997;  
Lombard and Ditton, 1997; Biocca, in press), virtual environment design (Short,
Williams et al., 1976; Held and Durlach, 1992; Barfield, 1995), and in psychological  
measurement of user responses to virtual environments (Draper and Blair, 1996;  
Ellis, 1996; Ellis, Dorighi et al., 1997; Freeman, 1998; Ijsselsteijn, 1998;  
Ijsselsteijn and de Ridder, 1998; Murray, Arnold et al., 1998; Witmer and Singer,
1998; Slater, 1999; Lombard, Ditton et al., 2000; IJsselsteijn, de Ridder et al.,
Faculty Composition 
The unit ensures that the professional education faculty represent cultural diversity.


Center for Research on Teacher Learning (NCRTL) suggests both possibilities and 
problems for institutional responses to the refined NCATE standards and indicators.
The NCRTL Study 
This document reports on portions of a study on "Teacher Education for Diversity" 
which we have been conducting since 1990. The overall study includes an ongoing analysis of 
relevant literature, which has generated a conceptual framework describing the range of 
existing positions on teacher education for cultural diversity, and the development of three 
case studies of exemplary programs which employ different organizational arrangements and 
instructional strategies that contravene or compensate for the cultural insularity of teacher 
education faculty, characteristic of most of the 1,200 institutions which prepare teachers in 
the United States. Although an adequate definition of "diversity" needs to be broad and 
inclusive with attention to such other areas as gender, age, religion, exceptionalities, sexual 
preference, etc., the use of the term "cultural diversity" in this study refers primarily to 
differences related to social class, race, ethnicity, and language.
The specific concern in our study has been to understand the variety of arrangements 
and strategies currently being used to prepare a predominantly white, monolingual student 
teaching force to teach poor students of color who have historically been unserved, ill-served,
or inappropriately served by traditional teaching practices1. Despite the rhetoric surrounding 
multicultural education and diversity in recent years and the attempts of groups like NCATE 
to force teacher educators to pay more serious attention to the issues, there are, in actuality,
few programs which substantively address these concerns. For example, according to 
Gollnick (1992), of the first 59 institutions which sought national accreditation for their 
teacher education programs under the 1987 standards, only eight (13.6%) were in full 
compliance with the minimum multicultural education requirements for teacher education 
programs.
After the Second World War, ethno-linguistic consciousness expanded as issues only  loosely linked with language gained regional sensitivity. The Royal Question and the  second School Struggle are emblematic here. First, a sharp political controversy  emerged in 1946 about King Leopold III’s political stance before and during the war  (Reynebeau 2005). This was essentially an ideological confrontation between  Catholics and atheist Socialists and turned on the strategy of the CVP, the Belgian  catholic (later Christian Democrat) party, to use its support for the King to win an  absolute political majority in the Belgian state by mobilizing the Flemish majority in  Belgium as a whole and the Catholic majority in Flanders. A referendum was held in  March 1950 on whether the King should step down or not; it gave Leopold III 57% of  the votes. This seemed to divide the country into a conservative and catholic  Flanders and an atheist and leftist Wallonia but the division between urban-industrial  and rural-agrarian groupings was actually more significant. For, while a majority of  the Flemings voted for the King, a majority of Walloons and Brussellois voted  against. The ensuing stalemate was only resolved when Leopold III abdicated,  signifying the failure of the Catholics’ absolute majority strategy. Yet Flemish  


 19  
nationalists often present this outcome as a defeat of the Flemish majority at Walloon  hands, reinforcing thereby claims about the repressive ‘francophone’ Belgian state.
The ‘second school struggle’ was precipitated when the Christian-democrats (CVP),  the biggest political party in Belgium, were ousted in 1954 by a socialist-liberal  coalition government (Reynebeau 1995; Reynebeau 2005; Witte 1997). This  reversed its predecessor’s pro-Catholic education policies, reactivating a crucial line  of conflict between Belgium’s opposing political-ideological forces rooted in the  nineteenth century competition between two cultural projects associated with the  liberal (and later Socialist) party and the Catholic – later Christian-democrat – party  respectively. One project was to build a secular national state, the other to promote  the values of the catholic majority. This conflict was alleviated by a compromise that  laid the basis of the Belgian pillarisation system. Public finance was granted to  develop a catholic socio-cultural pillar, allowing the Church to maintain ideological  control over its faith community, in return for its ceasing to contest Belgian nation-  and state-building. The post-war development of mass education enabled Socialists  and Liberals to break the resulting Catholic dominance in education by redirecting  public finance towards state education. The Catholic pillar responded by mobilizing  its grassroots in hard extra-parliamentary action. The dispute was resolved through a  school pact in 1958 that increased resources for free (i.e., Catholic) education and  relaxing controls on the expansion of state education. While this mainly an  ideological conflict, it had a strong regional dimension because Catholics were overrepresented in Flanders and Socialists in Wallonia.
Such issues show how ideological conflicts among Socialists, Liberals and Catholics  could become intertwined with language politics (Huyse 1980; Reynebeau 1995).  The latter gradually developed into a conflict between geographically separated  communities defending different societal models. In particular, once the School Pact  significantly reduced tensions between the Catholic and secular groupings, political  energy in the 1960s and 1970s could turn to socio-economic issues and ethnolinguistic conflicts (Witte 1997). These two conflicts converged in the strikes against  the Unity Law in 1960 and 1961, prompted by the severe economic crisis of the  1950s and the shifting of the economic centre of gravity in the ABC-axis towards  Flanders due to massive postwar investment in this region by multinationals  


 20  
(Vandermotten, Saey and Kesteloot 1990). These developments finally led the  Walloon working class to interpret structural economic decline in terms of a growing  polarization between Flanders’ dominance and Wallonia’s semi-peripheral status.
  
We have argued for the cultural turn in economic and political geography (as part of a  broader commitment, in our case at least, to a spatio-temporally sensitive political  economy) on the grounds that this enables an escape from ‘hard political economy’,  i.e., the naturalization and fetishization of economic categories without regard to their  discursively mediated, socially constructed character. But we have also argued that  the cultural turn should be combined with critical political economy, which we see as  a broad movement rather than one linked exclusively to just one theorist, school, or  tradition. This is one way to resist the temptation of ‘soft’ economic or political  geographies characteristic of the new economic sociology and its importation into  these fields (for a critique, see Peck 2005). We use the term ‘soft’ here to describe  the subsumption of economic or political categories under general sociological (or  cultural) analysis so that the analysis loses sight of the historical specificity and  materiality of economics and the dynamics of state power. In developing CPE we  have called for serious analysis of variation, selection, and retention in terms of  semiotic and extra-semiotic mechanisms. This enables us to distinguish cultural  political economy from critical discourse analysis in terms of its ‘value-added’. For,  whereas critical discourse analysis tends to focus on specific texts, to undertake  static comparative analyses of selected texts at different times, or to study linguistic  corpora over time, CPE is also interested in the variation, selection, and retention of  different discourses and, in this regard, is also concerned with their extra-semiotic as  well as semiotic features. Our case study of Belgium illustrates how these  mechanisms operate to select, retain, and reinforce specific imaginaries and thereby  shape the concrete, contextualized, and contingent dynamics of a particular economy  in its specific social and cultural settings as this changes over time. It also shows  that, however resonant and persuasive an economic imaginary and its corresponding  strategies might be, this is not sufficient to ensure that they can be realized when  path-dependent (material as well as semiotic) legacies and the conjunctures  (including the capacities and strategies of social forces mobilized behind competing  imaginaries) render then more or less ‘arbitrary, rationalistic, and willed’.


 32  
  
References    
Agnew, John, 2000. From the political economy of regions to regional political  economy. Progress in Human Geography 24, 101-110.
Barnett, Clive, 2004. A Critique of the cultural turn. In: Duncan, S., Nuala N.C.,  Johnson, C., and Schein, R.H. (Eds.), A Companion to Cultural Geography.  Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 38-48.
Bayart, Jean-François, 1994. L’invention paradoxale de la mode économique. In:  Bayart, Jean-François, La réinvention du capitalisme. Éditions Karthala, Paris,  pp. 9-43.
Blommaert, Jan, 2000. 'Ik stel vast'. Politiek taalgebruik in het tijdperk van  vernieuwing.  EPO, Berchem.
Brenner, Neil, 1999. Beyond state-centrism? Space, territoriality and geographical  scale in globalisation studies.Theory and Society 28, 39-78.
The systems that have emerged vary considerably although all countries have formally retained the principle of universal access to care. Changes have been both planned and unplanned. Planned changes include a move to more pluralistic systems of both funding and delivery. New systems of funding have included shifts to health insurance and expansion of out-of-pocket payments (Field 1999). Planned reforms of health care delivery include decentralization of the organization of the system.
However, in many countries it is the unplanned changes that have been more important in shaping the new system. They include a substantial increase in informal payments in some countries (Lewis 2002) and a breakdown of existing systems for health system governance.
While there is extensive anecdotal evidence that access to care has suffered in this region, some small-scale studies indicating how particular groups,
Health Service Utilization in the Former Soviet Union 1929 


such as those with chronic diseases, have suffered considerably (Hopkinson et al. 2004; Telishevska, Chenet, and McKee 2001). Secondary analysis of survey data revealed that 0.6 percent of households in Kyrgyzstan and 3.9 percent in Ukraine faced catastrophic expenditure due to health costs in one year (Xu et al. 2003), and a recent study in Tajikistan documents large inequalities in access to care related to affordability (Falkingham 2004). However, there is, to our knowledge, no systematic research comparing how changes in different ex-Soviet countries have affected access to health care. This study begins to fill this gap by examining patterns of health system utilization in eight former Soviet Union countries, exploring the socioeconomic determinants of utilization and the extent of payment for health care, looking in detail at those who, despite illness, do not have access health care.
OBJECTIVE 
The objective of this article is to assess the extent to which universal access to care has been maintained in eight of the countries that emerged from the U.S.S.R. It is part of a larger study on living conditions, lifestyle, and health (LLH), undertaken within the European Union’s Copernicus program. The study included surveys in eight of the fifteen newly independent states: Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine (Institute for Advanced Studies 2003). Of the remaining countries, three (Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) are now members of the European Union and in the other four (Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan) survey research is extremely difficult and we were unable to identify local partners.
In this article we examine the health-seeking behavior of two groups of people. The first are those who consult a health care provider (regardless of whether they have had experienced an illness), looking at the situations in which they consult, where, whether they pay for these services, and their views onwhen it is appropriate to seek care. The second group are those who, despite experiencing illness, did not consult, even though they felt they should have done so.
exchanging opinions, generating ideas, resolving conflicts, or maintaining friendly  
relations.
2. Use of social presence measures to assess the performance of “social presence”  
technologies.
Successive generations of emerging networked interfaces are designed to  
mediate social communication with remote others. These communication systems  
and interfaces are progressively designed to improve human communication for  
collaborative work (Weiming, 2001), education (Hazemi and Hailes 2001; Steeples  
and Jones, 2002), social services, or e-commerce (Save, Guazzelli et al., 2001).
While all these technologies are varied they share a common goal: Most of these  
technologies are designed, engineered, and manufactured to increase social  
presence. For the purpose of this article we will refer to technologies that are  
primarily intended to increase real time social interaction as social presence  
technologies. Examples of evolving social presence technologies include:  
· Collaborative work environments: Work environments are characterized by  
increased use of varied mediated work interactions (e.g., Churchill, Snowdon et  
al., 2001; Coovert and Thompson, 2001) that supplement or substitute face-

to-face interaction.  There appears to be accompanying growth in  
telecommunication infrastructure to support this interaction (Internet.com,
2001).
· Mobile and wireless telecommunication: Mobile systems increasingly offer  
promise of continuous social contact across space and time via multimodal  


    
6  
access (Brown, Green et al., 2001) and the sensory and social presence of that  
access is increasing via mobile video telephony and other message systems.
While the anchoring theme was not retained on the Belgian scale for lack of political-institutional and material supports, it still had strong discursive resonance in Flemish  circles. Thus it informed, albeit without great public fanfare, the industrial policy of the  Flemish government (1988-1992); this was led for a fourth time by Geens, whom we  encountered above as one of the contributors to the Belgian anchoring debate.  Flemish anchoring gained a much higher public profile in the next Flemish  government, led by minister-president Van der Brande, from 1992, when it became  official Flemish government policy. For it became the main economic imaginary  promoted by various state agencies and public bodies (Oosterlynck 2006; Van den  Brande et al. 1992). The central element in this imaginary was the ‘French threat’ as  French companies were depicted as disproportionately present in ‘strategic sectors’  of the Belgian economy, such as utilities, banks, insurance companies and holdings  (Brockmans 1995; Vlaamse Culturele Koepel and Vereniging Vlaamse Leerkrachten  1995). Flemish anchorers also criticised the extended network of cross-participations  that included French investors active in Belgium as well as the French government’s  steering role in these networks. They even suggested that the French investors were  part of a French geo-political strategy intended to bind the Belgian into the French  space economy in order to counter the growing influence of a re-unified Germany in  constructing Europe. ‘Christmas trees’ of interacting shareholderships were depicted  (Oosterlynck 2005a) and autonomy indexes developed to highlight the perceived  French threat (Vlaamse Culturele Koepel and Vereniging Vlaamse Leerkrachten  1995). These indexes reveal Flemish anchorers’ mode of calculation. Flanders’  autonomy index was allegedly unbalanced because only 18.9% of companies  located there are owned by Flemings, whereas Wallonia’s index is balanced because  69.6% of the companies are in francophone ownership. Francophone here includes  


 24  
Walloon, francophone Belgian and French. Thus Flemish anchorers assume some  kind of ‘natural’ affinity between Wallonia, francophone Belgium (which also includes  Brussels) and France. The use of this index and similar representations resonated  well with Flemish public opinion because the Flemish imaginaries treat all  francophone Belgians as having the same values and interests. This is false  (Oosterlynck 2005b; Quévit 1978). There have always been tensions between the  Walloon movement, which focuses on economic issues and Walloon popular culture,  and francophone Brussels, with its strong attachment to French high culture and the  defence of the pure French language (Kesteloot 2004). These tensions were  reinforced by Walloon frustration with the withdrawal of francophone holding capital  from its economy, especially after the strikes against the Unity Law in 1960/1961.
The central position of the perceived French threat in the Flemish anchoring debate  is one of two key dimensions of the Flemish economic imaginary, namely, the  narration of globalization in Flanders as French colonization. This imaginary proved  quite powerful, although de Grauwe’s research on FDI between 1980 and 1990  shows that it was based on a selective reading of economic trends (De Grauwe  1992). Although France had the biggest share of FDI in this period, namely 30%, the  FDI stream was concentrated in 1988 and 1989, i.e. the years in which Suez bought  the Société Générale. Outside these two years, French FDI was in third place behind  Germany (26.4%) and the Netherlands (21.2%). Daems similarly notes that the  French were responsible for 59 of the 222 take-overs in 1985-90 compared to 57  made by the Dutch (Daems and Van de Weyer 1993). In addition to its exaggerated  fear of the French, the Flemish globalization imaginary is based on the idea of  mutually exclusive spaces. This second dimension is rooted, like the first, in the  demand for linguistic territorial integrity and historic fear of French dominance. The  spatially segregated unilingualism and the federal solution to manage a distinctive  ‘communautarian’ politics that are the legacy of the historical struggle of the Flemish  movement made the Flemish public opinion and elites more receptive to such  imaginaries. Discourses based on the idea that two actors cannot occupy the same  place were transmitted from the cultural and political to the economic domain so that  the French economic presence was narrated as foreign ‘penetration’ that would  undermine Flemish control over its economy.


- 3 -

trade, urbanization and overall economic development, including the costs of the attacks 
of September 11, 2001.3 Several estimates of the effects of terrorism will be given, but it 
is, of course, not possible to come up with one single figure for the economic damages 
caused by terrorism. Moreover, the overall effects of terrorism may well exceed the 
economic consequences. Therefore, possible approaches for estimating the utility losses 
of the population affected, as well as first results, are discussed in section 4. Section 5 
offers concluding remarks.
2 Counting terrorist acts and casualties 
Most studies assessing the tragedy of terrorism rely on indicators of terrorist activity.4 
Some of the social science literature uses these measures directly to evaluate the harm 
suffered. In the research surveyed below, measures of terrorist activity are used as an 
input to calculate the various costs of terrorism to the economy. This section, therefore,
briefly discusses how terrorist activity is captured in international statistics.
A frequently used indicator is the number of terrorist incidents. However, counting the 
number of terrorist incidents means that terrorist activities of widely varying magnitude 
are lumped together. The attacks on the World Trade Center would be counted as one (or 
perhaps two) event(s), the same as taking one person as a hostage. Such measurements 
can capture developments in terrorism only if the structure of terrorist events remains 
more or less unchanged. Thus, measuring the number of incidents makes sense if the 
percentage of hostage takings and major attacks remains approximately constant. The 
varying intensity of terrorist attacks is often captured by the number of casualties. Some 
data only use the number of persons killed, while other data also take into consideration 
the number of people injured.
                                                   3 Related issues not discussed in this paper are the effects of terrorism on fiscal policy (see e.g. Eichenbaum and Fisher 2004; Gupta et al. 2004) and the discussion about the insurability of terrorism risks (see e.g. Cummins and Lewis 2003; Kunreuther et al. 2003; Brown et al. 2004). Precursors interested in the general interaction between war, peace and economic conditions are Pigou (1916; 1921), Keynes (1919) and Robbins (1940). More recent contributions, analyzing the interaction of conflict and economic activity, are Hess and Orphanides (1995; 2001), Garfinkel (1990; 1994), Grossman (1991) and Collier and Hoeffler (2004). 4 Exceptions are Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003), who use a truce unilaterally declared by the ETA in the late 1990s as a natural experiment, and the studies focusing on the consequences of specific incidents, such as the September 11, 2001 attacks discussed in section 3.


- 4 -

Another problem is that only those terrorist events reflected in official statistics and 
reported in the media are counted. Reliance on official statistics is often mistaken,

CREMA  Gellertstrasse 24  CH - 4052 Basel   www.crema-research.ch  
    
CREMA      
Center for Research in Economics, Management and the Arts  
              
CALCULATING TRAGEDY:  
ASSESSING THE COSTS OF TERRORISM  
  
  
  
Bruno S. Frey  
Simon Luechinger  
Alois Stutzer  
  
  
  
  
  
Working Paper No. 2004 - 23  


CALCULATING TRAGEDY: 
ASSESSING THE COSTS OF TERRORISM 
Bruno S. Frey, Simon Luechinger and Alois Stutzer ∗ 
University of Zurich 
July 22, 2004 
Abstract: The trends and consequences of terrorist activities are often captured by 
counting the number of incidents and casualties. More recently, the effects of terrorist 
acts on various aspects of the economy have been analyzed. These costs are surveyed 
and put in perspective. As economic consequences are only a part of the overall costs 
of terrorism, possible approaches for estimating the utility losses of the people affected 
are discussed. Results using the life satisfaction approach, in which individual utility is 
approximated by self-reported subjective well-being, suggest that people’s utility losses 
may far exceed the purely economic consequences.
JEL classification: D74, H56, I31 
Keywords: Terrorism, subjective well-being, life satisfaction, utility loss 
                                                   ∗ Address: Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of Zurich, Bluemlisalpstr. 10, CH-8006 Zurich, Switzerland. Phone: 0041-1-634 37 31, fax: 0041-1-634 49 07, e-mail: bsfrey@iew.unizh.ch, sluechinger@iew.unizh.ch and astutzer@iew.unizh.ch. The first and third authors are also associated with CREMA - Center for Research in Economics, Management and the Arts. The first part of the title is borrowed from a homonymous Economist-article (2004).


CALCULATING TRAGEDY: 
ASSESSING THE COSTS OF TERRORISM 
1 Introduction 
Most people take it for granted that terrorism is the major plague we are now dealing with 
in the 21st century. On a number of occasions, terrorists succeeded in inflicting massive 
civilian casualties and colossal damage, as in the case of the attacks on the World Trade 
Towers in New York on September 11, 2001, and the bombings of three railway stations 
in Madrid on March 11, 2004. Although, in connection with the proliferation of religious 
terrorism, the propensity for spectacular large-scale attacks increased, terrorism is not 
restricted to Islamic militants in general and al Queda in particular. Rather, many 
countries were plagued by terrorist campaigns in the 20th century. Fighters in anti-

colonial struggles, ethnic separatist groups, revolutionary left-wing terrorists and their 
right-wing counterparts all tried to harm their opponents in order to force them to yield to 
their demands or overthrow them (see e.g. Hoffman 1998; Wilkinson 2000). In addition 
to the direct losses incurred and the climate of fear evoked by terrorist attacks, counter-

terrorism policies can further impair daily life and economic development in terrorism-

ridden countries.1 
This paper aims to show that the damage done by terrorism can be empirically measured.2 
In recent years, economic scholars have analyzed the effects terrorist acts have on various 
aspects of the economy and society. We briefly discuss how the extent of terrorism is 
measured and the most important trends in international terrorism (section 2). The 
following section assesses empirical studies on the impact of terrorism on tourism,
foreign direct investment, savings and consumption, investments, stock markets, foreign                                                    1 Terrorism can have serious effects on other aspects of society, such as on politics. Thus, the terrorist attack in Madrid on March 11, 2004 resulted in a sudden and substantial drop in the votes going to the reigning Partido Popular, so that it lost the election which it had looked virtually certain to win before. This loss has been largely attributed to the incompetent reaction on the part of the government to the attack (Financial Times 2004, p. 11). Studying the relationship between terrorist attacks in Israel and the occupied territories from 1990 and 2003 and electoral outcomes in Israel, Berrebi and Klor (2004) find that relative support for the rightist party increases after periods with high levels of terrorism and decreases after relatively calm periods. 2 No general survey on the economic research on terrorism is provided in this paper; this has been done elsewhere. See e.g. Enders and Sandler (1995), Frey and Luechinger (2003) and Sandler and Enders (2004).
1. 12 
(0. 99 
) 48 
4, 0.
89 (0.
98 ) 
Co ho 
rt 2 
B oy 
s 55 
5, 1.
31 (1.
05 ) 
52 0,
1. 32 
(1. 08 
) 50 
8, 1.

Does watching TV make us happy?
Bruno S. Frey a,*, Christine Benesch a, Alois Stutzer b 
a Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 30, CH-8006 Zurich, Switzerland 
b Department of Economics, University of Basel, Petersgraben 51, CH-4003 Basel, Switzerland 
Received 20 January 2006; received in revised form 5 July 2006; accepted 4 August 2006 Available online 14 February 2007 
Abstract 
Watching TV is a major human activity. Because of its immediate benefits at negligible immediate marginal costs it is for many people tempting to view TV rather than to pursue more engaging activities. As a consequence, individuals with incomplete control over, and foresight into, their own behavior watch more TV than they consider optimal for themselves and their well-being is lower than what could be achieved. We find that heavy TV viewers, and in particular those with significant opportunity cost of time, report lower life satisfaction. Long TV hours are also linked to higher material aspirations and anxiety. ! 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: D12; D91; I31; J22 
PsycINFO classification: 3000; 3740; 3900 
Keywords: Life satisfaction; Mispredicting utility; Revealed behavior; Self-control problem; TV consumption 
1. Introduction 
Watching TV is a very important activity, carried out by most people in the majority of countries. On average, people in Europe spend 226 min watching TV a day, in the United 
0167-4870/$ - see front matter ! 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.joep.2007.02.001 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +41 44 634 3730; fax: +41 44 634 3599. E-mail address: bsfrey@iew.unizh.ch (B.S. Frey).
Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 
www.elsevier.com/locate/joep 



States TV viewing, on average, amounts even to 297 min per day (IP Germany, 2005). In many countries nowadays, watching TV occupies on average almost as much time as working. As it is a totally voluntary, freely chosen activity, it seems obvious that people enjoy it, because they would not do it otherwise. They are more satisfied with having the opportunity to watch TV to the extent they do rather than watching less TV or none at all.
This implication is shared by standard neoclassical economic theory. Individuals are assumed to know best what provides them with utility and are free to choose the amount of TV consumption that suits them best. By revealed preference, it follows from the fact that individuals watch so much TV as has been empirically observed that it provides them with considerable utility.
Recent developments, particularly in behavioral economics, cast doubt on this conclusion. The theory of revealed preference has been questioned (see, for instance, Sen, 1982, 1995): it is, in general, not possible to infer the utility produced by observing behavior, because individuals do not always act rationally. More concretely, anomalies and biases in behavior have been identified (e.g. Thaler, 1992), which undermine the direct link between observed behavior and the utility gained. Individuals may also be subject to habits which they do not have fully under control. They may consume some goods, such as drugs, alcohol or tobacco to a greater extent than they find to be good for themselves. They are subject to a self-control problem (e.g. Schelling, 1984), again interfering with the direct relationship proposed by revealed preference theory. As Gruber and Mullainathan (Gruber & Mullainathan, 2005) empirically show, (predicted) smokers, according to their own evaluation, consider themselves to be better off if smoking was restricted by a tax. Finally, individuals may systematically mispredict the utility derived from future consumption (e.g. Loewenstein, O’Donoghue, & Rabin, 2003; Loewenstein & Schkade, 1999). In particular, happiness research (for a survey, see Frey & Stutzer, 2002a, 2002b; Layard, 2005) has empirically shown that individuals overestimate the utility of future income (e.g. Easterlin, 2001), at the same time as they underestimate the utility of personal interactions (Frey & Stutzer, 2004). The consumption decisions made by individuals are systematically distorted according to their own evaluations.
Other work on computer-mediated communication and human-computer  
interaction has adapted these kinds of measures of interpersonal communication to  
assess the extent to which interactivity is achieved behaviorally and perceptually  
(see, e.g. Burgoon, Bonito et al., 2000; Bonito, Burgoon et al., 2000, November;  


    
22  
Stoner, 2001; Ramirez, 2001, November; Ramirez and Burgoon, 2001,
November; Burgoon, Bonito et al., in press; Burgoon, Bonito et al., in press). To  
the extent that interactivity fosters social presence and/or social presence is one  
marker of interactivity, these measures, which include constructs such as  
involvement, identification, and multiple facets of mutuality (connectedness,
similarity, receptivity, coordination), may tap into dimensions of social presence.
Other communication qualities, such as composure, spontaneity, positivity,
richness, and evaluation, may represent not social presence itself, but rather  
markers of the quality of communication that transpires when social presence is  
realized or not.
Social judgments of the other  
While measures of involvement, intimacy, and immediacy involve judgments  
of a specific interaction or the other’s general communication abilities, some  
measures are very explicitly attributional measures of the other or broad  
evaluations of the relationship with the other.
The Roots of the Study: The Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods  
T 


To measure disorder, trained observers videotaped what was happening on the face blocks6 of more than 23,000 streets in 196 neighborhoods that varied by race/ethnicity and social class. As the observers drove and filmed, they produced a permanent visual record that would be accessible at any time. They also logged the observations they made on each face block. Counted as signs of physical disorder were such items as garbage on the streets, litter, graffiti, abandoned cars, and needles and syringes. Counted as signs of social disorder were such activities as loitering, public consumption of alcohol, public intoxication, presumed drug sales, and the presence  of groups of young people manifesting signs of gang membership.
Obtaining information about neighborhoods 
To find out the extent of neighborhood collective efficacy, some 3,800 residents of these neighborhoods were interviewed. From the interviews came information about how much informal social control was exercised to contain disorder and crime and how much cohesion residents saw in their neighborhoods. People were asked, for example, about the likelihood their neighbors would take action if they saw children misbehaving in public and whether the neighbors were willing to help each other. The information about social cohesion and informal social control was then combined to produce a measure of collective efficacy.
Five measures of the extent of crime were used. Neighborhood residents were asked whether they or a member of their household had recently been victimized either by violent crime or by a burglary or theft. (They were also asked separately how much of a problem they believed various social incivilities—for example, drinking in 
public—to be.) Police records were examined for counts of three types of crime—homicide, robbery, and burglary. Neighborhood structural characteristics believed to be key to explaining the level of crime and disorder were measured by examining the extent of poverty, the concentration of immigrants, and residential stability.7 
Residents’ ability to act as “guardians” who exercise informal social control of their neighborhood may also be affected by population density and type of land use. Presumably, the more people per unit of space, the greater the anonymity and the more difficult for residents to identify wrongdoers. Similarly, the commercial traffic density accompanying mixed-use land use (in which residential and commercial development are combined) has been shown to be related to crime and disorder and may inhibit social interaction and surveillance. Because these two factors affect opportunities for crime, the study took them into account.
What explains disorder?
The analysis revealed that a neighborhood’s structural characteristics matter greatly in affecting levels of disorder. Poverty was the single most important factor found to influence the level of disorder in the Chicago neighborhoods studied. Disorder tends to be high not only where levels of poverty are high but also where immigrant populations are concentrated. And regardless of sociodemographic characteristics, neighborhoods where land use is mixed tend to have higher levels of physical and social disorder.
In neighborhoods where collective efficacy was strong, the levels of physical and social disorder observed were correspondingly low. This finding is consistent with the idea that collective 
efficacy acts to inhibit disorder. This finding also held after controlling for sociodemographic characteristics, type of land use, and residents’ perceptions of the amount of crime and disorder.
Third, contrary to other studies from the preschool to the elementary school years (Kingston & Prior, 1995; Munson et al., 2001), we did not identify a group of children with increasing rates of aggression. This divergence appears to be due to two important methodological differences. First, previous studies included a wide range of externalizing behavior problems (such as opposition, and verbal aggression) in their definition of aggression whereas we focused on physical aggression. Second, previous studies often used a priori cut-off points to select groups that were labeled aggressive and not aggressive (see Nagin & Tremblay, 1999). Given the declining trends in the development of PA, and the absence of a trajectory which shows increasing levels, it appears clear that from 2 years of age until pre-adolescence, children typically learn to suppress PA more than they learn to use it. Those 


82 Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc, Nagin, and Tremblay 
who remain on a high-level trajectory appear to fail to learn to inhibit physically aggressive behaviors, and fail to learn alternative behavioral strategies (Tremblay, 2003). Studies of PA trajectories during adolescence have shown increases in frequency, especially by individuals on the chronic trajectory (Brame et al., 2001; Lacourse et al., 2002). However, these increases are followed by a rapid decline. With a large sample of juvenile delinquents followed up to old age, Sampson and Laub (2003) have also shown that there is a general tendency of decreasing antisocial behavior with age, including physical aggression. The results from these studies suggest that there are very few cases of children who are not physically aggressive during the preschool years and then become physically aggressive as they grow older.
A fourth aim of the study was to examine sex differences in PA. Our comparisons of boys and girls indicated that boys were 1.67 times more likely to follow the high and stable trajectory of PA. Thus, between 2 and 11 years of age, boys tended to be more physically aggressive than girls. Similar sex differences were found among participants in the NICHD ECCRN study: boys were more likely to follow a moderate (the second highest trajectory OR: 1.68) or a high (OR: 2.89) trajectory as compared to the (two) lowest trajectories. Together, these results suggest that the magnitude of the sex difference in PA is already quite large in toddlerhood—girls are already more likely to be on low desisting trajectories and boys more likely to be on high and more stable trajectories. The difference between males and females is also consistent with previous studies showing sex differences in social behavior, including PA during early childhood (Archer & Coˆte´, 2005; Kochanska, Murray, & Harlan, 2000; Maccoby, 1998; Tremblay et al., 2004), and other studies showing that a much larger proportion of males follow a life-course persistent trajectory of antisocial behaviors from an early age (Moffitt et al., 2001).
A final aim of the study was to identify risk factors that distinguish children who follow atypically high PA trajectories from those who do not. We hypothesized that children with high levels of PA would have a more adverse family background and family environments as compared to all other children. Results from the logistic regression analyses showed that being male, being from a low income family and having a mother with a low level of education were all associated with the high and stable trajectory of PA. When adding family process variables to this model, the same variables remained significant and, in addition, hostile/ineffective parenting strongly predicted the high PA trajectory. Note that none of the risk factors interacted with the sex of the child, which indicates that the strength of the association between the risk factors and a high 
trajectory of PA did not vary by sex. This result is in line with a previous study indicating that most of the risk factors for persistent antisocial behaviors did not vary by sex (Moffitt et al., 2001).
Williams et al., 1976, p.650) Therefore, the measure asks respondent to directly  
evaluate the properties of medium for social presence.
But there may be two reasons why this approach to measurement may limit  
the usefulness and effectiveness of a measure of social presence. Can users reliably  
access the properties of a medium that might affect their behavior? Is social  
presence just an attitude towards a medium? It has been demonstrated in several  
studies (e.g., Nisbett and Ross, 1980) that respondents cannot reliably identify  
what is the cause of their attitudes. It is not clear that they can directly introspect  


    
28  
to make a judgment of how well this or that medium “causes their social  
presence.” If the goal is to get a direct measure of the medium, it is likely that such  
a measure would not be valid. Various other aspects of the interaction are likely to  
color the respondents perception of the “social presence capabilities” of the  
medium.
The Short, Williams and Christie measure of social presence appears to be  
concerned with the extent to which an actor perceives a medium as capable of  
allowing a sense of social presence. The judgment being made is to what extent  
the actor perceives the medium as unsociable-sociable, insensitive-sensitive, cold-

warm, and impersonal-personal. But this may be a social judgment about a  
medium, not a judgment about one’s state within the medium. Media  
appropriateness (Rice, 1993) appears on face value to be a more accurate fit than  
social presence as this measure of social presence is a global judgment of the  
medium based on ones total experience with the medium.
If social presence is conceptualized as a fluctuating phenomenal state, then  
measures of the fixed properties of a medium may not appropriate  
operationalizations. In such cases then social presence is a feature of the  
communication interaction and the medium is one causal variable shaping that  
social interaction. The medium may influence a fluctuating level of social presence,
but social presence will not be specifically directing attributions about medium per  
se.


    
29  
Problems created by measures that include embedded assumptions about the  
technology used in the social interaction  
Most researchers would agree that social presence is a phenomenon that is  
independent of a specific technology and that one can experience some level of  
social presence with most media. Therefore, a useable measure of social presence  
should be able to measure social presence across most media. But almost all  
measures of social presence are constructed by researchers to address an issue in  
a specific technology: F2F interaction, email systems, teleconferencing systems, or  
virtual environments. Researchers may create a theory, or more typically, develop  
a measurement instrument that is specifically suited to the technology they are  
studying.


Figure 1 
The draft document entitled "Proposed Refinement of NCATE's Standards for the 
Accreditation of Professional Education Units" indicates that the Committee's goal was 
threefold: (1) to reduce duplication across standards, (2) clarify language, and (3) reorganize 
the standards to emphasize importance (p. 1). In accomplishing these goals, the Committee 
rewrote existing indicators and generated new ones which clearly specify a template for 
addressing issues of diversity. As selectively illustrated in Figure 1, these revisions or 
additions concern most of the Standards, thereby making attention to diversity explicit where 
it was heretofore, at best, implicit. They include explicit references to the design and content 
of the teacher education curriculum, the quality of instruction for teacher candidates,
collaborative relationships within the professional community, the composition of the faculty 
and teacher candidate body, faculty qualifications, and governance and accountability of the 
unit responsible for preparing teachers.
While we agree with the intent and thrust of the Standards Committee's efforts to 
make multicultural education a more central concern in all teacher education programs, our 
ongoing research on Preparing Teachers for Diversity sponsored by the National 
EXAMPLES OF THE PROPOSED NCATE STANDARDS 
RELATED TO PREPARING TEACHERS FOR CULTURAL DIVERSITY 
Design of the Curriculum 
Courses and experiences in professional studies incorporate multicultural and global perspectives.
The integrative studies enable candidates to develop meaningful learning experiences for students within the context of students' cultures, language backgrounds, socioeconomic studies, communities, and families.
Quality of Instruction 
Instruction reflects knowledge about multicultural education, cultural context, exceptionalities, curriculum design, instruction, and evaluation.
Faculty Qualifications 
Faculty have developed multicultural competencies through formal study or experiences in culturally diverse settings.
In order to test for the possibility that age was associated with PA for one sex but not the other, we conducted an additional analysis. Specifically, the interaction between cohort and sex was entered in a multinomial logit model. The sex X cohort variable was not statistically significant (χ2 = 2.31, p = 0.99), indicating that there was no variation in the association between age and PA by sex.
Predictors of the High PA Trajectory 
Multivariate logit regression was then used to examine the capacity of the family risk factors to distinguish 
membership in the highest physical aggression trajectory group controlling for the levels of the other risk factors. Two models were tested. In the first, the sex of the child and family characteristics (early motherhood, low maternal education, separated family, low income) were entered as predictors of the high-level trajectory of PA. In the second, sex, family characteristics, and family processes (positive, hostile, and consistent parenting; family functioning) variables were entered. In addition, we tested all interactions between the predictors and the sex of the child in order to examine potential sex differences in the predictors.
Results 
Table II presents the means and standard deviations on PA scores by cohort, sex and age. As Table II indicates, the mean physical aggression scores generally declined with age and are lower for girls. We then estimated group-based developmental trajectory models. The best fitting model included three trajectory groups and is presented in Fig. 1. The bold lines represent trajectories of actual behaviors, calculated as the children’s mean scores weighted by the probability of belonging to the trajectory to which they were assigned. The light lines represent predicted behaviors and are calculated using the model’s coefficient estimates.
The procedure identified a “low desister” group to which 31.1% of the sample was estimated to belong. These children exhibited low frequencies of PA in toddlerhood and declining levels during the preschool and elementary school years. They exhibited virtually no PA by age 11 years. The second group was labeled “moderate desister” and represented 52.2% of the sample. The moderate desisters exhibited moderate (or occasional) use of PA in toddlerhood and declining levels during the preschool and elementary school years. They exhibited PA infrequently by age 11 years. Finally, the third group was labeled “high stable” and represented 16.6% of the sample. Children in this group exhibited more frequent use of PA in toddlerhood as compared to their peers, and their levels remained high and stable during the preschool and elementary school years. The proportions of boys in the low desister, moderate desister and high trajectories were 43.86, 52.25, and 61.76%, respectively.
Physical Aggression Trajectories by Sex 
With the intention of comparing the development of boys and girls, we first estimated separate models for each 


78 Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc, Nagin, and Tremblay 
Ta bl 
e II 
. M 
ea ns 
an d 
St an 
da rd 
D ev 
ia tio 
n (SD 
)o n 
Ph ys 
ic al 
A gg 
re ss 
io n 
Sc or 
es by 
A ge 
an d 
Co ho 
rt (n 
= 10 
,6 58 
) 
A ge 
in ye 
ar s 
2 3 
4 5 
6 7 
8 9 
10 11 
N, M 
ea n 
(SD ) 
Co ho 
rt 1 
B oy 
s 54 
2, 1.
33 (1.
The research team includes Felton J. Earls, principal investigator and director of the project, Harvard Medical School; Stephen L. Buka, coprincipal investigator, Harvard School of Public Health; Robert J. Sampson, scientific director for community design, University of Chicago; Stephen Raudenbush, scientific director for analysis, University of Michigan; Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, scientific director for longitudinal design, Columbia University Teachers College; Maya Carlson, policy analyst, Harvard Medical School; and Daniel Kindlon, research associate, Harvard Medical School.
NIJ reports on the project. To date, researchers have amassed a wealth of information that reveals significant ways in which the social environment of a neighborhood shapes and determines behavior and identifies the developmental pathways that lead individuals toward or away from a variety of antisocial behaviors. This knowledge should help practitioners and policymakers develop effective strategies for prevention, intervention, treatment, and rehabilitation, as well as sanctions. Among NIJ publications of project findings are the following:  
? Adolescent Girls: The Role of Depression in the Development of Delinquency, by Dawn A. Obeidallah and Felton J. Earls (Research Preview, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, July 1999, NCJ FS 000244).
? Attitudes Toward Crime, Police, and the Law: Individual and Neighborhood Differences, by Robert J. Sampson and D.J. Bartusch (Research Preview, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, June 1999,  FS 000240).
? Linking Community Factors and Individual Development, by Felton J. Earls (Research Preview, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, September 1998, FS 000230).
? Neighborhood Collective Efficacy— Does It Help Reduce Violence? by Robert J. Sampson, Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls (Research Preview, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice,  April 1998, FS 000203).
? Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods: A Research Update, by Felton J. Earls and Christy Visher (Research in Brief, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, February 1997, NCJ 163603).
However, there are also ways in which citizenship has always involved  something like the privation of vision. Citizenship has involved a certain self-absenting from the quotidian social world with its identities, interests and perspectives. To act as a citizen is to think of the good of society in the abstract, and thus in some sense to leave behind one’s private identity and interests; and this self-absenting is itself often conceived visually, in terms of seeing from a vantage point that transcends particular locations and narrow horizons. This is even more so the case with cosmopolitan citizenship, in which individuals are expected to transcend their very culture. Such a perspective is perhaps offered by a global view, one that views not locality or nation as the primary area of identification but the world as a whole. We explore this globalizing of vision in the next section.
The world seen from afar9 
In December 1968, as Apollo 8 completed the first manned circuit around  the far side of the moon, astronaut William Anders took a photograph of  the distant Earth which came to symbolize the leveling effects of distance  on ethical perception. NASA image AS08-14-2383, commonly referred to as 
120 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


Earthrise, was not the first full-Earth image, but it was startlingly clear and received a huge amount of attention when the 70mm film was brought back and developed. Anders says that he prefers to hang the picture as he experienced it – as if he were once again coming around the side of the moon, with vertiginous infinite blackness ‘below’ him, and catching a welcoming sight of the Earth again.10 However, Earthrise is usually reproduced as a conventional nocturnal landscape with a half moon, except for the reversal of landscape and celestial object – all colour is in the celestial orb, not the landscape – and the lack of any stars in the image, which seems to emphasize the isolation of terrestrial life (Cosgrove 1994: 275).
The image quickly enjoyed massive circulation. A few weeks after the flight, Apollo 8 Commander Frank Borman received a telegram that just said, ‘You saved 1968’. The image was used as a backdrop for news and current affairs programmes, and on the cover of The Whole Earth Catalogue. It has been widely cited as playing a key role in inspiring the first Earth Day, held in 1970, and in galvanizing the then still emergent environmental movement (Goldberg 1991: 57).11 Cosgrove quotes at length the essay by the American poet Archibald MacLeish that appeared in the New York Times on Christmas Day 1968.12 It was reprinted alongside Earthrise in the May 1969 issue of the National Geographic. ‘For the first time in all of time’, McLeish wrote,
men have seen [the Earth] not as continents or oceans from the little distance of a hundred miles or two or three, but seen it from the depth of space; seen it whole and round and beautiful and small . . . To see the Earth as it truly is, small and blue and beautiful in that eternal silence where it floats, is to see ourselves as riders on the Earth together, brothers on that bright loveliness in the eternal cold – brothers who know now that they are truly brothers. (MacLeish 1968) 
Here, for once, we seemed to have the perfect icon for the ‘unlimited finitude’ of the earth, and for the panhumanity that dwells upon it (Franklin, Lury and Stacey 2000).
In our survey of a twenty-four hour period of broadcast content,13 we found numerous examples of such ‘global’ images, leading us to suggest that global imagery was starting to constitute an unremarked, all-pervasive background to people’s lives, one with the potential to reshape their sense of belonging. Television is not important here simply for its cognitive effects or its ideological bias, but in terms of its circulation of symbolic resources, and its flow-like form as a medium. It circulates images and narratives – images of places, brands, peoples and the globe itself, and narratives of various figures, heroes and organizations (see Alexander and Jacobs 1998, by contrast, on the narrative structure of national civil society). Above such content, television also has certain formal, collage-like characteristics that might have the effect of displacing unreflective identification with local and national cultures and placing 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 121 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


them within a far wider context so as to facilitate cultural, emotional and moral encounters with various global ‘others’.
DISCUSSION We observed large differences in long-term sickness absence rates between a Japanese and a British cohort of employed men. The difference between the two cohorts was larger in lower grade white-collar employees than in higher grade white-collar employees. These data also revealed differences in rates of first occurrence of long-term sickness absence between whitecollar and blue-collar workers and between employment grades in Japan. These results are consistent with reports of higher rates of sickness absence among less skilled non-manual and manual employees.14–19 However, employment grade differences in sickness absence have not been previously reported for a Japanese cohort. We analysed long-term sick leave of more than 7 days, which require medical certification. Sickness absence can be seen as an integrated measure of social, physical and psychological functioning and health.12 
Accordingly, previous studies show that sickness absence 
– particularly longer spells – is strongly associated with various measures of ill health.20 The Whitehall II study findings suggested that longer spells of absence might be better indicators of ill health, because several more direct measures of health were more strongly associated with rates of longer spells of absence than shorter spells. Also age was not related to rates of short spells, but more strongly related to rates of longer spells of absence. In our data a strong association between poor self-rated health and sickness absence was observed particularly in the British cohort. The relative risk for first occurrence of sickness absence among those with poor self-rated health was 3.15 in the British and 1.69 in the Japanese cohort. Both ex-smoking and current smoking were also significant predictors of sickness absence in both cohorts. Alcohol consumption and physical activity reduced the risk of sickness absence among British men, but were less consistently associated with sickness absence in Japan. The prevalence of poor self-rated health and unhealthy behaviours were higher in the Japanese cohort, and thus did not explain differences in sickness absence between the two cohorts. It is suggested that some part of the socio-economic difference in sickness absence can be attributed to differences in behavioural risk factors and baseline ill health. In the Japanese cohort socio-economic differences in the prevalence of behavioural risk factors (smoking, drinking and physical activity) were small, but were clearly seen in the British cohort. This observation, coupled with a less consistent association between behavioural risk factors and sickness absence in the Japanese cohort, corresponds well with the observation that the employment grade difference in sickness absence rates was smaller in the Japanese than the British cohort. Adjustment for the behavioural risk factors as well as self-rated health at baseline attenuated employment grade differences in sickness absence in both cohorts and the white-collar vs. blue-collar difference in 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Higher Lower Higher Lower Higher Lower 
white-collar blue-collar white-collar  
Japan Japan Britain 
H az 
ar d  
ra tio 
Table 3 Age adjusted hazard ratio of first occurrence of long-term sickness absence according to selected baseline factors by study population 
Japan Britain 
Factors Hazard ratio (95% CI) Hazard ratio (95% CI) 
Self-rated health 
Average vs good 1.17 (0.90–1.51) 1.66 (1.51–1.83) 
Poor vs good 1.69 (1.26–2.28) 3.15 (2.68–3.70) 
Smoking 
Ex vs never 1.39 (1.07–1.80) 1.11 (1.02–1.21) 
Current vs never 1.43 (1.17–1.75) 1.51 (1.35–1.67) 
Drinking 
1–3 /wk vs <1 /wk 1.05 (0.82–1.35) 0.76 (0.69–0.84) 
≥3/ wk vs <1 /wk 0.97 (0.78–1.19) 0.72 (0.65–0.80) Activity 
Moderate vs others 1.08 (0.90–1.31) 0.84 (0.77–0.93) 
Vigorous vs others 0.89 (0.67–1.20) 0.76 (0.69–0.85) 
Table 4 Hazard ratio of first occurrence of long-term sickness absence according to selected baseline factors by study population 
Adjusted for age Adjusted for age and othersa  
Population Grade Hazard ratio (95% CI) Hazard ratio (95% CI) 
Japan 
White-collar Lower vs higher 1.50 (1.04–1.11) 1.36 (0.94–1.97) 
Blue-collar Lower vs higher 1.31 (1.02–1.05) 1.29 (1.06–1.57) 
Britain Lower vs higher 2.04 (1.88–2.21) 1.60 (1.12–2.28) 
a: Smoking, drinking, physical activity and self-rated health.
In this article, we review the state of social presence theory and  
measurement and propose some criteria and scope conditions for a useable theory  
and measure of social presence. We hope this analysis and the criteria proposed  
can contribute to the development of a theory that is sufficiently large in scope, but  
also delimited so as to predict, explain, control and operationalize social presence.
In the sections that follow we will:  
· Discuss three areas of HCI research where social presence theory and  
measurement can advance research.
· Provide a review, classification of dimensions, and critique of current definitions  
of social presence.
· Review and assess current measures of social presence.
· Propose criteria, scope conditions, and example scenarios to that a theory of  
social presence would need to explain and measure.
  


    
4  
Examples where a more robust theory and measure social presence  
advance research.
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 739 


The basic equation for calculating the GS rate is: 
GS ? ~investment in manufactured capital? net foreign borrowing ? net official transfers? depreciation of manufactured capital ? current education expenditures ? net depreciation of natural capital and 
cost of atmospheric pollution! 0 gross national income ~GNI! 
Note that investment in manufactured capital minus foreign borrowing plus net official transfers minus depreciation of manufactured capital is equal to net national savings+ While the traditional national accounting treats government spending on education as consumption, the adjusted savings treats it as investment+ This is regarded as a first approximation to the full value of human capital investment, which is difficult to measure precisely+ Depreciation of natural capital covers nonrenewable resource extraction such as fossil fuels and minerals as well as forestry+ Cost of atmospheric pollution is approximated by the damage caused by carbon dioxide emissions+ Detailed definitions of each item are provided in Appendix 1+ Investment in manufactured capital “anchors” the GS rate as it forms the starting point from which items are added and subtracted+Across countries, resource depletion and investment in human capital represent the major correction components to net national savings with the cost of atmospheric pollution playing a smaller role+ With a mean value of 2+88 percent of gross national income, resource depletion is not quite as important on average as educational expenditures at 3+94 percent++ Still, it is important given that the mean value of net national savings is 8+87 percent+ Also, its standard deviation is quite high ~4+85!, and for some resource-intensive countries, the resource depletion component can actually be almost as big as, or in many cases even bigger, than net national savings+ Appendix 2 lists each country’s GS rates and its change, both averaged over the entire period of study+ 
Statistical Methods and Data 
This study employs a pooled, time-series, cross-section ~TSCS! data set+ The data are for roughly 135 countries, spanning twenty years+56 The data set is unbalanced and contains over 2,000 data points ~an average of about fifteen country-years!+ There are no clear models to guide the determinants of GS+ We control for the following factors because of their connection to the main globalization variables and direct effects on the dependent variable+We account for important factors predicting the gross savings rate, so as to control as fully as possible, but parsimoni-

56+ They are taken from World Bank 2002+ The data for Angola and Sudan only are from World Bank 2003a because their values seem to be reported with errors in World Bank 2002+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 10042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:740 
?
?
?
740 International Organization 


ously, for determinants of manufactured capital savings that may relate to GS directly and to our globalization variables+57 Note that fiscal policy variables such as government expenditures, tax revenues, and others cannot be included in the estimations because income minus private and government consumption expenditures is equal to investment and they thus form part of GS+58 Their inclusion would therefore effectively construct a partial identity between the left-hand side and the right-hand side of the equation+ The same argument applies to measures of public debt since net foreign borrowing forms part of GS+ 
Our measure of dependence on trade is total trade to GDP @~imports? exports!0 GDP# +59 FDI dependence is calculated as the ratio of stock to GDP, obtained from the United Nations, which is the most comprehensive data on the activities of multinational corporations ~MNCs! in poor countries+60 The stock of FDI is accumulated investment over time, which captures the structural power of MNCs over a host economy to a greater degree than do FDI flows alone+61 Trade and FDI are logged to reduce skewness+ 
The hypothesis of the supporters of globalization is that trade and investment openness lead to “good” economic, market-oriented policies+ Often, such openness is used as an indirect proxy for such policies+ In addition, we also want to test the impact of an admittedly subjective, but direct measure of good economic policies, namely the Fraser Institute’s index of economic freedom+62 It is made up of approximately thirty-five components of objective indicators capturing the extent of economic freedom within countries+ The index measures freedom of economic activity according to the following criteria in quintiles since 1980:63 
1+ Size of government based on spending and the level of state ownership of enterprises+ 
2+ Strength of legal system and sanctity of private property rights+ 3+ Access to sound money+ 4+ Freedom to exchange with foreigners+ 5+ The extent of regulation of economic activity+ 
57+ We have largely relied on the World Bank’s research program on savings across the world to pick several variables found to be associated with public and private savings rates+ See Loayza et al+ 1998; and Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Servén 2000+ The basic model employs per capita income, its growth rate, and urbanization—variables that have data points for at least 135 countries+ For robustness, we also test broad money supply ~M20GDP!, and the age dependency ratio+ Using these variables lowers the sample of countries considerably+ The World Bank’s research on savings can be accessed at: ^http:00www+worldbank+org0research0projects0savings0savinwld+htm&+ Accessed 10 March 2005+ 
58+ Note that some forms of government induced inefficiencies will be captured by our measure of economic freedom, albeit imperfectly+ 
59+ All data are taken from World Bank 2002 unless noted otherwise+ 60+ United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 2003+ 61+ See Bornschier and Chase-Dunn 1985; de Soysa and Oneal 1999; and Grimes and Kentor 2003+ 62+ Gwartney and Lawson 2003+ 63+ See ^www+freetheworld+com& for details+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 11042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:741 
?

A comparison of socio-economic differences in long-term sickness absence in a Japanese cohort 
and a British cohort of employed men YUKO MORIKAWA, PEKKA MARTIKAINEN, JENNY HEAD, MICHAEL MARMOT,
MASAO ISHIZAKI, HIDEAKI NAKAGAWA * 
Objectives: To compare the magnitude of socio-economic differences in sickness absence rates between a Japanese cohort and a British cohort. To assess the effects of self-rated health and behavioural risk factors on sickness absence in the two cohorts, and whether they explain socio-economic differences in sickness absence within and between cohorts. Methods: An 8 year follow up study of sickness absence in 2504 Japanese male employees in a factory in Japan and 6290 British male employees in civil service departments in London. The rates of first occurrences of long-term (>7 calendar days) sickness absence were determined and compared between these cohorts. Socio-economic status was measured with hierarchical employment grades. Results: The first time sickness absence rates were about two times higher among British men as compared with Japanese men. The rate ratio of lower to higher employment grade was 1.2, 1.3 and 2.1 among Japanese white-collar, Japanese blue-collar and British white-collar employees respectively. Baseline self-rated health and smoking habit predicted sickness absence in both cohorts. After adjusting for these factors a significant difference between the Japanese and British cohorts, and between employment grades remained. Conclusions: The rate of long-term sickness absence was higher in the British cohort than the Japanese cohort. We also demonstrated consistent socio-economic differences in long-term sickness absence in Japan, although these differences were smaller than in Britain. Behavioural risk factors and self-rated health at baseline were predictors of sickness absence within both cohorts. However, socio-economic differences in sickness absence were only partly explained by these factors.
Keywords: comparative study, sickness absence, socio-economic status 
The Japanese population has achieved rapid improvement in life expectancy during the period following World War II and has become one of the countries with the longest life expectancy.1 
Several reasons for this have been discussed. These include a more favourable diet, lower levels of obesity and total cholesterol than in many Western European countries.2 Other factors may include good access to medical care and public health services.3 
Also working conditions, such as life-long employment and promotion and salary increases being determined by age and seniority rather than on a competition, might be relevant. The social environment is an important cause of ill health. Although an inverse relationship between socio-economic status and morbidity and mortality has been widely documented,4–6 
relatively little research on social inequalities in health in Japan has been carried out. The studies that have been published to date indicate that socio-economic differences in mortality and morbidity do not seem to be uniformly smaller in Japan than in other developed countries.7–10 However, socio-economic differences in behavioural and biological risk factors appear to be less consistent in Japan than elsewhere.11 
In this study, we analyse medically certified long-term sickness absence rates in a Japanese and a British cohort of middle-aged employees. Medically certified sickness absence serves as a measure of health in the working population when health is understood 
as a combination of social, psychosocial and physiological functioning and well being.12 The specific aims of this study were: 
to compare socio-economic differences in sickness absence rates in Japanese and British employees; to investigate the effects of self-rated health, smoking, alcohol consumption and physical activity on sickness absence rates in these two cohorts; and to assess whether these factors explain socio-economic differences in sickness absence rates within and between cohorts.
1993; Chang, 1999, 2001; Milem & Hakuta, 2000).
This brief summary suggests that diversity experiences are not only related to desired  
substantive outcomes of college, but they also shape the way students think about themselves in  
relation to others, the nature of the activities in which they engage, and the value they place on  
attitudes toward others and their skills and competencies in working with different types of  
people during and after college (Gurin, 1999). That is, as a result of experiencing diversity in  
college, students learn how to work effectively with others and how to actively participate and  
contribute to a democratic society. Moreover, through engaging with people from different  
backgrounds and with different life experiences, students are adding to the foundation of skills  
and dispositions that is essential for living a productive, satisfying life after college in an  
increasingly multicultural world. Thus, the very act of experiencing diversity during college  
helps students develop the habits of the mind and heart that enlarge their capacity for doing so  
after college (Kuh, 2003; Shulman, 2002).
Forms of Diversity Present on College Campuses  
Three forms of diversity exist to varying degrees on college and university campuses that  
potentially influence the way students think and behave (Chang, 2001; Chang, 2002; Gurin,
1999; Milem & Hakuta, 2000). The first, structural diversity refers to the numerical  
representation of students from different racial and ethnic groups in the student body (Hurtado,
Milem, Clayton-Pedersen, & Allen, 1998; Hurtado et al., 1999). The greater the number of  
students from different backgrounds, the more likely it is that a student will have an opportunity  
to interact with someone from a different race or ethnic background. In addition, a critical mass  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 5  
of students of color is important in creating an environment that uses diversity to enhance  
learning processes.
A second type of diversity involves the number and nature of diversity-related initiatives  
that colleges and universities make available. These include among others required multicultural  
or diversity courses (often as part of the general education component), elective ethnic studies  
courses, cultural awareness workshops offered during orientation and throughout the year, and  
cultural centers. While demographic shifts or changes in the structural diversity of campuses  
frequently stimulate the creation of these efforts (Chang, 2001), some colleges and universities  
make these opportunities available primarily because their campus lacks racial and ethnic  
diversity.

Social Presence     1  
     
      
  
Towards A More Robust Theory and Measure of Social Presence:   
Review and Suggested Criteria  
  
Frank Biocca1  
Chad Harms1  
Judee K. Burgoon2  
  1Media Interface & Network Design (M.I.N.D.) Lab  
 Michigan State University  
East Lansing, MI 48824  
2Media Interface & Network Design (M.I.N.D.) Lab  
Human Communication Research,
Center for the Management of Information,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721  
biocca Biocca, F., Harms, C., & Burgoon, J. (2003). Towards a more robust theory and measure of social presence: Review and suggested criteria. Presence: Teleoperators and virtual environments. Manuscript. Published version may differ slightly.
biocca slightly.
biocca differ 
biocca Published version may 
biocca Manuscript.


  Towards A More Robust Theory and Measure of Social Presence:   
Review And Suggested Criteria  
  
Abstract  
At a time of increased social usage of net and collaborative applications a  
robust and detailed theory of social presence could contribute to our  
understanding of social behavior in mediated environments, allow  
researchers to predict and measure differences among media interfaces, and  
guide the design of new social environments and interfaces. A broader theory  
of social presence can guide more valid and reliable measures. The article  
reviews, classifies, and critiques existing theories and measures of social  
presence. A set of criteria and scope conditions is proposed to help remedy  
limitations in past theories and measures and to provide a contribution to a  
more robust theory and measure of social presence.
17. Although of course diverse other senses get mobilized at the margins, as occasional resistances, as resistant ‘bodies of nature’ (Macnaghten and Urry 2001).
Bibliography 
Adams, John 1999 The Social Implications of Hybermobility, Paris: OECD. Albrow, Martin 1996 The Global Age, Cambridge: Polity. Alexander, Jeffrey C. and Jacobs, Ronald N. l998 ‘Mass Communication, Ritual and Civil Society’, in Tamar Liebes and James Curran (eds) Media, Ritual and Identity, London: Routledge. Anderson, Benedict 1983 Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism, London: Verso. Appadurai, Arjun 1996 Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Arendt, Hannah 1958 The Human Condition, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Barrell, John 1972 The Idea of Landscape and the Sense of Place: 1730–1840, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bauman, Zygmunt 1993 Postmodern Ethics, Oxford: Blackwell. Bauman, Zygmunt 2000 Liquid Modernity, Cambridge: Polity Press. Beck, Ulrich 1998 ‘The Cosmopolitan Manifesto’, New Statesman 1996, 20 March. Beck, Ulrich 2000 ‘The Cosmopolitan Perspective: On the Sociology of the Second Age of Modernity’, British Journal of Sociology 51(1): 79–106. Beck, Ulrich and Sznaider, Natan 2006 ‘Unpacking Cosmopolitanism for the Humanities and Social Sciences:A Research Agenda’, British Journal of Sociology 57(1): 1–23. Billig, Michael 1995 Banal Nationalism, London: Sage. Buzard, James 1993 The Beaten Track, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Casey, Edward S. 1996 ‘How to Get from Space to Place in a Fairly Short Stretch  of Time: Phenomenological Prolegomena’, in Steven Feld and Keith H. Basso (eds), Senses of Place, Santa Fe: School of  American Research Press. Cass, Noel, Shove, Elizabeth and Urry, John 2005 ‘Social Exclusion, Mobility and Access,’ Sociological Review 53(3): 539–55. Cheah, Pheng and Robbins, Bruce (eds) 1998 Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling Beyond the Nation, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Commission on Global Governance 1995 Our Global Neighbourhood: The Report of the Commission on Global Governance, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Cosgrove, Denis 1994, ‘Contested Global Visions: One-World, Whole-Earth, and the Apollo Space Photographs’, Annals of the Association of American Geographers 84(2): 270–94. Countryside Commission 1998 Countryside Character, Vol. 2: North West, Cheltenham: Countryside Commission. Countryside Commission and English Nature 1996 The Character of England: Landscape, Wildlife and Natural Features, Cheltenham/Peterborough: Countryside Commission/English Nature. Dateline Consortium 2003 Deliverable 11: Final report. Project Report, Brussels: European Commission. Dayan, Daniel and Katz, Elihu 1992 Media Events: The Live Broadcasting of History, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University  Press. Department for Transport 2004 Transport Statistics Bulletin: National Travel Survey: 



130 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 
2003 Final Results, London: Department for Transport. Doyle, J., Nathan, M. 2001 Wherever Next: Work in a Mobile World, London:The Industrial Society. Featherstone, Mike 1993 ‘Global and Local Cultures’, in Jon Bird, Barry Curtis, Tim Putnam, George Robertson and Lisa Tickner (eds) Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change, London: Sage. Forster, E.M. 1931 Howards End, Harmondsworth: Penguin [first published London: Edward Arnold, 1910]. Foucault, Michel 1977 Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, London: Allen Lane. Frändberg, L. and Wilhelmson, B. 2003 ‘Personal Mobility: A Corporeal Dimension of Transnationalisation. The Case of Longdistance Travel from Sweden’, Environment and Planning A 35: 1751–68. Franklin, Adrian 2001 Nature and Social Theory, London: Sage. Franklin, Sarah, Lury, Celia and Stacey, Jackie 2000 Global Nature, Global Culture: Gender, Race, and Life Itself, London: Sage. Friedman, Jonathan 1994 Cultural Identity and Global Process, London: Sage. Giddens, Anthony 1990 The Consequences of Modernity, Cambridge: Polity Press. Gitlin, Todd 1980 The Whole World Is Watching: Mass Media in the Making and Unmaking of the New Left, Berkeley: University of California Press. Goldberg, Vicky 1991 The Power of Photography: How Photographs Changed Our Lives, New York: Abbeville Press. Habermas, Jürgen 1989 The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society, Cambridge: Polity Press. Hannerz, Ulf 1990 ‘Cosmopolitans and Locals in World Culture’, in Mike Featherstone (ed.) Global Culture: Nationalism, Globalization and Modernity, London: Sage. Harley, J.B. 1992 ‘Deconstructing the Map’, in Trevor J. Barnes and James S. Duncan (eds) Writing Worlds: Discourse, Text and Metaphor in the Representation of Landscape, London: Routledge.
The degree of informal social control  is not the same in all neighborhoods. Where the rules of comportment are unclear and people mistrust one another, they are unlikely to take action against disorder and crime. Where there is cohesion and mutual trust among neighbors, the likelihood is greater that they will share a willingness to intervene for the common good. This link of cohesion and trust with shared expectations for intervening in support of neighborhood social control has been termed “collective efficacy,” a key social process proposed in this research as an inhibitor of both crime and disorder.4 
These two sets of forces—structural characteristics of neighborhoods and human intervention—are interrelated, working jointly and reciprocally to affect crime and disorder. Concentrated disadvantage and residential instability undermine collective efficacy, in turn fostering increased crime and, by implication, public disorder. If the broken windows thesis is correct, and disorder directly causes crime, then disorder should mediate the effects of neighborhood structural characteristics and collective efficacy on crime. By contrast, if disorder is a manifestation of the same forces that produce crime, then collective efficacy and structural characteristics should account for the relationship between disorder and crime. In other words, the disorder-crime link would be spurious.
2 
R  e  s  e  a  r  c  h    i  n    B  r  i  e  f   


3 R  e  s  e  a  r  c  h    i  n    B  r  i  e  f   
Measuring disorder 
The method of measuring disorder was different from the one used by the majority of studies that link signs of disorder with fear of crime and crime victimization. Because these studies rely on surveys conducted among residents, they tap subjective perceptions and they generally find that perceptions of disorder are associated with 
fear of crime. The study reported here assessed visual cues independently of residents’ perceptions—the amount of disorder in the neighborhoods studied was measured by directly observing what was happening on the streets during the day. This method of observation is consistent with the informal social control mechanism of collective efficacy, which also focuses on what is visible in public places.
In this type of measurement, named “systematic social observation” (SSO), the means of observation are independent of what is observed. The method is systematic in the sense that observation and recording are done in a way that permits replication. What is observed are “natural social phenomena”—events and their consequences, viewed more or less as they occur.5 
he Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods is a long-range study of the way communities influence people’s social development. As a study of crime in the context of community, the project examines not just the activities of people and their communities, but also the activities of people in their communities. Social scientists from a range of fields are conducting the study and NIJ has published several reports of the findings.
The study topics. The social, economic, organizational, political, and cultural structures of Chicago’s neighborhoods are being examined, as are the changes taking place in them over time. The other component of the project is a series of long-range assessments of the personal characteristics and changing circumstances of children, adolescents, and their primary caregivers. Information has been collected from nearly 9,000 residents of 343 Chicago neighborhoods, more than 2,800 key community leaders, and a sample of more than 6,000 children and adolescents (ranging in age from birth to 18 years). The study aims to unravel processes working at the levels of the individual, family, and community that determine what makes some neighborhoods safe and law-abiding and others dangerous.
The National Institute of Justice is conducting the study in partnership with the Harvard School of Public Health. The project is cofunded by the John D. and 
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation; the National Institute of Mental Health; the Administration on Children, Youth and Families of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; and the U.S. Department of Education.
Unlike the physical environment, social communication in virtual  
environments might be built upon minimal or constrained social cues.  Animated  
characters and even the computer interface itself can generate strong automatic  
social responses from minimal social cues. Social responses to computer  
characters for example, are generated even though the user is quite aware that the  
computer is not an emotional or social agent but a machine. Such virtual  
environments are an experimental setting to explore the limits of human social  
responses and the effects of various cues (Reeves and Nass, 1996; Loomis,
Blascovich et al., 1998; Blascovich, 2001).


    
8  
Like presence, social presence is presumed to have its foundation in  
psychological mechanisms that have evolved for and are active during un-mediated  
interactions (Premack and Premack, 1996). A strong theory of social presence  
might also provide us with insight into how people automatically respond to social  
cues and generate simulations or mental models of “other minds” from the physical  
and communication cues provided by the bodies and actions of others (Gordon,
1986; Dennett, 1987; Carruthers and Smith, 1996; Dennett, 1996; Premack and  
Premack, 1996).
Finally, a theory of social presence may yield insights into the nature of  
nonverbal and interpersonal communication. By addressing issues of what essential  
attributes are needed to establish connection with others, we may arrive at a  
better understanding of how humans arrive at that sense of mutuality that  
underpins all communication between people and that is a prerequisite to  
establishing common ground. It may also focus attention on how nonverbal  
behaviors, many of which harken back to primordial urges and instincts, function to  
define and maintain interpersonal relationships.
Current Definitions and Conceptualizations of Social Presence  
Presence is frequently presented as consisting of two interrelated  
phenomena (Heeter, 1992; Biocca and Levy, 1995; Biocca, 1997):   
· telepresence, the phenomenal sense of “being there” including automatic  
responses to spatial cues and the mental models of mediated spaces that  
create the illusion of place;   


    
9  
· social presence, the sense of “being together with another” including primitive  
responses to social cues, simulations of “other minds,” and automatically-

generated models of the intentionality of others (i.e., people, animals, agents,

Bogus Refugees? The Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe 
ERIC NEUMAYER 
London School of Economics and Political Science and Center for the Study of Civil War 
This article analyzes the determinants of asylum migration to Western Europe. Potential asylum seekers balance the costs of staying versus the costs of migrating. Estimation results confirm that economic hardship and economic discrimination against ethnic minorities lead to higher flows of asylum seekers. However, political oppression, human rights abuse, violent conflict, and state failure are also important determinants. Migration networks and geographical proximity are important facilitators of asylum flows as predicted by theory and colonial experience, religious similarity, and casual contact with the developed world (aid, trade, and tourism) are not. Natural disasters and famines are also not statistically significant determinants. These events are typically short term and unexpected, whereas asylum migration to Western Europe requires preparatory planning. If Western European countries want to tackle the root causes of asylum migration, then they need to undertake policy measures that promote economic development, democracy, respect for human rights, and peaceful conflict resolution in countries of origin.
Asylum migration creates conflict within developed countries between natives and asylum seekers, and it creates conflict between neighboring developed countries, with one trying to pass the burden of migration to the other. Yet, even though the international flow of people has been on the agenda of international affairs for many years (Teitelbaum, 1984), it is still an under-researched area of international relations relative to the flow of, say, trade and finance. This article looks at an important aspect of this international flow of people and analyzes the following question: what factors can explain asylum migration to Western European countries? We will analyze whether country-specific aggregate numbers of asylum seekers in Western Europe1 can be explained by economic factors only, as the widespread perception of asylum seekers as ‘‘bogus refugees’’ would suggest, or whether aspects of political oppression, human rights abuse, and generalized violence in the countries of origin also play an important role.2 This has important 
Author’s note: Thanks are due to three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. The data in STATA8 format together with a do-file reproducing the results are available at ISQ’s website. Financial assistance from the Le-

verhulme Trust is gratefully acknowledged. 1 We focus on Western Europe rather than other developed countries because of better data availability. 2 Looking at recognition rates on asylum applications is no alternative to such analysis. Decreasing recognition 
rates could be the consequence of more restrictive recognition rules, particularly with respect to the treatment of asylum applicants who are refugees in the wider sense, but who do not fulfil the restrictive legal definition of the 1951 Convention. That such rates often vary substantially across destination countries (Neumayer, 2005), and in 
federal jurisdictions like Switzerland even within one country, suggests that it would be erroneous to simply look at these (Holzer, Schneider, and Widmer, 2000a).
r 2005 International Studies Association. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA, and 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK.
International Studies Quarterly (2005) 49, 389–409 


policy implications on what destination countries can do to tackle the root causes of asylum migration. The question of what makes an asylum seeker a ‘‘genuine’’ refugee is of course 
already highly contentious (Robinson and Segrott, 2002). A refugee in the legal sense is defined in Article 1 of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees as a person who ‘‘owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality, and is unable to or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country. . .’’. Such refugees enjoy the right of non-refoulementFthe right not to be returned to their country of origin. This definition does not directly cover threats to one’s personal integrity from other causes, for example, people fleeing from war, political violence not specifically directed against them, natural disasters, famine, and the like. As Roberts notes, developed countries have always been against extending the formal definition of refugees, ‘‘no doubt because of a refusal to accept the consequent duty to provide asylum’’ (Roberts, 1998:381). Nevertheless, because it is difficult to justify denying protection for these other ‘‘genuine’’ refugees altogether, many more asylum applicants are de facto accepted as refugees and granted non-refoulement. They are, however, not officially granted asylum and are often not provided with the same rights as given to those granted asylum (UNHCR, 2000). Humanitarian concerns notwithstanding, all countries have used asylum policies 
partly to further their own interests. Politics and geography matter when it comes to asylum seekers. For instance, the institution of asylum was little contested for people fleeing in small numbers from Eastern European Communist countries. On the contrary, such asylum seekers served to ‘‘embarrass and discredit adversary nations’’ (Teitelbaum, 1984:430). Things changed in the 1970s and 1980s when asylum seekers were no longer the same as before: ‘‘they were increasingly third world in origin; they had less in common culturally with Europeans than previous asylum movements; and they arrived, often illegally, through the use of traffickers and/or false documentation’’ (Hansen and King, 2000:400). Giving asylum to these people carries much less geopolitical reward to developed countries than did the welcoming of asylum seekers fleeing Communism. And of course, the numbers were also much higher than they used to beFsee Table 1. All these factors led to a backlash and various attempts by Western European and 
other developed country governments to reduce the number of people lodging asylum applications. Such policy measures are often justified with recourse to the argument that ‘‘a rising number of applicants for asylum (. . .) are not in genuine need of protection’’ (European Council, 1992:1). When numbers of asylum seekers were at their maximum, calls for restricting the inflow even of ‘‘genuine’’ refugees were not uncommon either. Western European countries have tried to restrict the increasing number of asylum seekers with the help of deterrence and deflection measures such as lists of ‘‘safe’’ third countries and ‘‘safe’’ origin countries to which asylum seekers could be sent back, visa restrictions, airline sanctions, and the like 
TABLE 1. Number of Asylum Applications in Developed Countries (in Thousands) 
1975–1979 1980–1984 1985–1989 1990–1994 1995–1999 1980–1999 
Total 233.6 793.8 1,495.6 3,373.3 2,751.7 8,414.55 Western Europe, of which 215.2 570.6 1,105.7 2,586.0 1,783.9 6,301.59 France 40.4 106.3 178.6 184.5 112.2 581.86 Germany 121.7 249.6 455.2 1,337.1 542.4 2,584.51 United Kingdom 3.3 17.4 28.5 150.8 223.2 420.13 Northern America 18.1 201.1 368.9 673.6 773.2 2,017.08 
Source: UNHCR (2001).

        
      
Student Experiences with Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges:     
Another Claim for Distinctiveness                        
Paul D. Umbach  Indiana University Center for Postsecondary Research  
1900 East 10th Street  Eigenmann Hall, Suite 419  
Bloomington, IN 47406-7512  pumbach@indiana.edu  Phone: 812.856.3004  
  George D. Kuh  
Indiana University Center for Postsecondary Research  1900 East 10th Street  
Eigenmann Hall, Suite 419  Bloomington, IN 47406-7512  
kuh@indiana.edu  Phone: 812.856.5824  
    
Paper presented at the 43rd Annual Forum for the Association for Institutional Research, 2003,  Tampa, FL  
  Accepted for publication in Journal of Higher Education  
      
  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 2  
  Abstract  
    
Student Experiences with Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges:   Another Claim for Distinctiveness  
  This study explores the relationship between organizational and individual characteristics  
and diversity-related experiences at liberal arts colleges. Compared with their counterparts at  other types of institutions, students at liberal arts colleges report more experiences with diversity.  In addition, this study also finds that diversity experiences are positively related with a variety of  student outcomes.


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 3  
Student Experiences with Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges:   
Another Claim for Distinctiveness  
Compelling arguments are coming from all quarters that diversity-related experiences  
benefit individual students, institutions, and society at large. Administrators (Bok, 1982;  
Rudenstine, 1996) and scholars (Astone & Nunez-Wormack, 1990; Duster, 1993; Gurin, 1999;  
Hurtado, Milem, Clayton-Pedersen, & Allen, 1999; Milem & Hakuta, 2000; Rudenstine, 1996,
1996; Tierney, 1993) are on record as endorsing the positive educational effects of diversity on  
campus. So far, the evidence seems to suggest that diversity enhances the educational  
experiences of all students. However, we are only beginning to understand the relationship  
between diversity and student experiences while in college.
Gurin (1999) argued that a diverse student body creates a unique learning environment  
that leads to increased probability that students will interact with peers from different  
background. Hurtado et al. (1999) suggested that diverse peers in the learning environment could  
improve intergroup relations and mutual understanding by challenging students to refine their  
thinking and enriching the dialogue between students (Duster, 1993; Sleeter & Grant, 1994).
Students who interact with people of different races other than their own learn about some of the  
realities of the multicultural world in which they will eventually be living and working (Astone  
& Nunez-Wormack, 1990; Tierney, 1993). These interactions, in turn, explain in part why  
students who report more diversity experiences show greater relative gains in critical and active  
thinking (Gurin, 1999; Pascarella, Edison, Nora, Hagedorn, & Terenzini, 1996). Experience with  
diversity also appears to be positively associated with retention rates and degree aspirations  
(Chang, 1999), more frequent participation in community service (Bowen & Bok, 1998; Gurin,
1999), and higher levels of civic engagement, cultural awareness, and commitment to improving  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 4  
racial understanding (Milem, 1994). Finally, diversity experiences seem to favorably influence  
overall satisfaction with the college experience and perceptions of the campus climate (Astin,
? The findings imply that although reducing disorder may reduce crime, this happens indirectly, by stabilizing neighborhoods via  collective efficacy.
Target audience: Local law  enforcement officials and policymakers, particularly those in urban areas; researchers, particularly those focused on violence  prevention.
Issues and Findings … continued 
The research produced an alternative interpretation of the link between disorder and crime, one that sees many elements of disorder as part and parcel of crime itself. Typical activities categorized as social disorder, such as soliciting prostitutes and loitering, and incivilities like painting graffiti are evidence of either crime or ordinance violations. The forces producing these minor crimes may be the same as those that produce more serious crimes, with the difference only in the degree of seriousness. Viewed this way, disorder and crime are manifestations of the same phenomenon.
What lies behind crime and  disorder?
The study proposes that both crime  and disorder stem from structural characteristics specific to certain neighborhoods, most notably concentrated poverty and the associated absence of social resources. The concentration of disadvantage refers not only to low incomes but also to high unemployment, a high ratio of financial dependence of one part of the population on another, and lack of investment potential.2 
Structural constraints are not necessarily or solely economic. Residential stability, typically measured by levels of home ownership and transience, has long been considered a key element of strong urban social organization3 and its absence a lost opportunity for residents to build a stake in the community. Still other social constraints, among them inordinate population density (which can overwhelm public services) and mixed land use, are also proposed as obstacles to overcoming public incivilities.
At the same time these social constraints may promote crime and disorder, there are forces working to inhibit them. Community residents are assumed to want to live in safe environments free of predatory crime and disorder, and they share 
common standards that underlie any collective effort on their part to establish social order and safety. These efforts are initiated or otherwise pursued informally through relatively noncoercive means, and are an expression of the self-regulating capacity of a social unit. Thus, neighborhood residents might use these means—informal social control mechanisms—to intervene in preventing truancy, public drinking, vandalism, or other manifestations of disorder.
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., et al. (2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297, 851–854.
Coˆte´, S. M., Vaillancourt, T., Barker, T., Nagin, D., & Tremblay, R. E. (in press). Predictors of Continutity and Change in the Joint Development of Physical and Indirect Aggression. Development and Psychopathology.
Crick, N. R., Ostrov, J. M., Appleyard, K., Jansen, E. A., & Casas, J. F. (2004). Relational aggression in early childhood: “You can’t come to my birthday party unless. . .” In M. Putallaz & K. L. Bierman (Eds.), Aggression, antisocial behavior, and violence among girls: A developmental perspective (pp. 71–89). New York: Guilford Press.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. London: John Murray, reprinted by Gryphon Editions 1989.
Dionne, G., Tremblay, R. E., Boivin, M., Laplante, D., & Pe´russe, D. (2003). Physical aggression and expressive vocabulary in 19 month-old twins. Developmental Psychology, 39, 261–273.
Dodge, K., Lochman, J. E., Harnish, J. D., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. S. (1997). Reactive and proactive aggression in school children and psychiatrically impaired chronically assaultive youth. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 37–51.
The Nature of Science A definition of the NOS is rarely elaborated with any degree of specificity in research reports.
Typically, the NOS has been used to refer to the epistemology of science, science as a way of knowing, or the values and beliefs inherent to the development of scientific knowledge. These characterizations, nevertheless, remain fairly general, and philosophers of science, historians of science, and science educators are quick to disagree on a specific definition for the NOS. It is our view, however, that most disagreements about the definition of such a highly prized educational outcome are irrelevant to K-12 instruction. That is, K-12 students will never be, nor should they be, miniature philosophers or historians of science. The disagreements that continue to exist among philosophers, historians, and science educators are far too abstract for K-12 students to understand and far too esoteric to be of immediate consequence to their daily lives. For example, the notion of whether there is an objective reality or only mental constructions is, perhaps, only of importance to the graduate student in philosophy. There is, however, an acceptable level of generality regarding the NOS that is accessible to K-12 students and also relevant to their daily lives. At this level of generality we can see clear connections between students’/citizens’ knowledge about science and decisions made regarding scientific claims. Also, at this level of generality, virtually no disagreement exists among historians, philosophers, and science educators (Lederman & Abd-El-Khalick, in press).
In our view, the aspects of the scientific enterprise that fall under this level of generality and that are emphasized in the present study, are that scientific knowledge is tentative (subject to change); empirically based (based on and/or derived from observations of the natural world); subjective (theory-laden); partly the product of human inference, imagination, and creativity (involves the invention of explanation); and socially and culturally embedded. Two additional important aspects are the distinction between observations and inferences, and the functions of, and relationships between scientific theories and laws.
It is important to note that individuals often conflate the NOS with science processes. We consider, along with the reforms (AAAS, 1990, 1993; NRC, 1996), scientific processes to be activities related to the collection and interpretation of data, and the derivation of conclusions. For example, observing and inferring are scientific processes. On the other hand, the NOS refers to the epistemological commitments underlying the activities of science. Consequently, an individual’s understanding that observations are constrained by our perceptual apparatus and are inherently theory-laden is part of that individual’s understanding of the NOS. Although there is overlap and interaction between science processes and NOS, it is nevertheless important to distinguish the two.
Assumptions Guiding Previous Research The first assumption guiding research on the NOS was that teachers’ conceptions were signifi-

cantly related to their students’ conceptions (Lederman, 1992). Given that students do not learn by 


THE NATURE OF SCIENCE AND INSTRUCTIONAL PRACTICE 419 
SCE (WILEJ) RIGHT INTERACTIVE 
short standard long 
osmosis, a second related assumption was that teachers’ conceptions automatically and necessarily translate into their classroom practice (Cotham & Smith, 1981; Nott & Wellington, 1996). A third assumption, specific to the teaching of the NOS, was that students learn about the NOS implicitly through engaging in science-based inquiry activities.
The longevity of the objective of helping students develop appropriate conceptions of the NOS has been surpassed only by the longevity of students’ and teachers’ inability to articulate the meaning of the phrase “nature of science,” and to delineate the associated characteristics of science (Lederman, 1992). Research has consistently shown that students’ and teachers’ views are not consistent with contemporary conceptions of the NOS (Duschl, 1990; Lederman, 1992; among others).
or fMRI have been used to measure social psychological responses such as the  
processing of affect and motivation (Blascovich, 2000), we are unaware of their  
use explicitly to measure mediated social presence. This may be due to absence of  
any consistent physiological signature simply for the presence of another even  
though interaction with others may elicit various psychophysiological responses  


    
24  
depending on context and interaction. As Blascovitch warns, “a one-to-one  
correspondence between specific behaviors and unitary physiological responses  
rarely exists… invariant indexes, whether subjective or objective, of social  
psychological constructs often prove illusive because target constructs; for  
example, risk-taking, love, prejudice, self-concept, themselves prove difficult to  
define” (Blascovich, 2000, p. 119-120). This problem applies to social presence as  
well.
How Might Current Conceptualizations and Measures of Social Presence  
Limit Their Usefulness and Effectiveness?
Do existing theories and measures of social presence provide adequate  
guidance for research on social interaction in virtual environments and for  
evaluating and measuring the relative social psychological impact of different  
interface design technologies? While the work shines light on the problem in many  
ways, existing theories and measures may not be developed adequately to fully  
support research on social presence in mediated environments.
While intuitive, the concept of social presence can be hard to explicate in a  
way that best supports the range of phenomena that fall within its domain and the  
needs of measurement.
Vague, overly broad, or circular definitions of social presence  
A common limitation affects is common to several definitions of social  
presence. Many may be stated too broadly and too vaguely to provide adequate  
guidance on the measurement of social presence. For example, others and we  
have sometimes defined social presence as “the sense of being with another” or  


    
25  
the “sense of being together” in a virtual environment. While this can be useful as a  
shorthand communication, it is inadequate as a definition. It merely replaces the  
words social presence with a new, limited set of terms that do not significantly  
advance the explication of the construct. The lack of explication, especially the  
failure to specify the dimensions of the construct, does not provide enough  
guidance to prepare and delimit the scope of the concept for successful  
operationalization and measurement.
Confounding of boundary conditions for social presence with the correlates or  
effects of social presence  
What is the difference between social presence and the effects of social  
presence? Most researchers would likely agree that the psychological state of social  
presence should be different and separate from the correlates and effects of being  
in a state of social presence. But the clear delineation of this line between social  
presence and its effects may be hard to accomplish, therefore, it remains unclear in  
several theories.
Overall, the results of the present and of other studies (Nagin & Tremblay, 2001; NICHD ECCRN, 2004; Tremblay et al., 2004) suggest that the failure to inhibit PA could be caused by factors similar to those proposed to be responsible for children’s learning of PA. Indeed, family characteristics and family processes conceptualized as promoting aggression may interfere with the socialization of aggression (Tremblay, 2003). Thus, the family characteristics identified in the present study (low income, low maternal education) may reflect family environments in which children have difficulty learning to inhibit their use of physical aggression, as well as difficulty learning alternative strategies to solve problems. One possible mechanism by which this occurs is parenting: parents with high risk characteristics may use parenting practices that do not help children learn to inhibit PA and learn alternative strategies to achieve their aims (e.g., Patterson, 1982; Shaw & Bell, 1993). However, we did not find parenting practices to explain the effects of family characteristics. We rather found that both had independent effects. Note that change in parenting was not assessed. Therefore, caution is required in interpreting the parenting effect: it may reflect the reciprocal influence between children and parents (Shaw & Bell, 1993).
There are two other mechanisms by which family risks may interfere with children’s socialization of aggression. First, children may have acquired, in utero and infancy, neurological deficits which limit their ability to learn to inhibit PA and use alternative strategies (Moffitt, 2003; Raine, 2002; Tremblay et al., 2004). Secondly, genetic factors may also be involved. Parents may share with their children genetic characteristics which do not facilitate learning of emotional regulation and inhibition of overt aggression. Genetically informative studies such as twin, adoption, and molecular genetic studies are needed to test the contribution of genetic factors and the likely gene-environment interactions and gene-environment correlations (e.g., Arseneault et al., 2003; Caspi et al., 2002; Dionne et al., 2003; Weaver et al, 2004) 
There are limitations to this study. First, the developmental patterns that we observed for PA do not necessarily generalize to other types of aggression. For instance, levels of indirect aggression have been shown to increase during the course of childhood (Coˆte´ et al., in press; Vaillancourt, 2005). Second, the use of an accelerated longitudinal design to study the developmental trajectories of PA in a large representative sample (n = 10,658) 


Trajectories of Physical Aggression 83 
is an important methodological innovation. However, the findings still need to be replicated with the youngest cohort once they have been assessed up to 11 years of age. Third, as the results indicated, an initial assessment at 2 years of age was too late to describe the “onset” of PA since children tended to exhibit their highest levels of these behaviors at the time of their initial assessment. A further limit is the reliance on mother ratings for the assessment of PA in the final model. The time line covered by the present study (toddlerhood to pre-adolescence) in combination with the type of sample (large and representative) make it difficult to rely on other sources of information than the parent. But, similar developmental patterns were observed during early childhood from observational data (Restoin et al., 1985). Still, the results need to be replicated with studies providing data from other informants that can assess children from infancy to adolescence (e.g., observers, day care educators and teachers). Finally, the items we selected to describe physical aggression from 2 to 11 years of age were originally conceived for studies of school age children (Achenbach & Edelbrock, 1983; Cairns et al., 1989; Rutter, Tizard, & Whitmore, 1970; Tremblay et al., 1991). It will be important, in future studies, to measure a wider variety of physically aggressive behaviors, as well as different forms of aggression (such as reactive and proactive aggression: Dodge, Lochman, Harnish, Bates, & Pettit, 1997; Tremblay, 2000; Vitaro, Gendreau, Tremblay, & Oligny, 1998) to examine their developmental trajectories.
3. Basic hypothesis: Watching too much TV 
Two opposite views are possible when qualifying the huge amount of leisure time spent in front of the TV. At first glance, it might seem obvious that watching TV produces high individual utility. TV watching is a voluntary activity and people can freely decide how much time they want to devote to it. However, an alternative view does not take consumer sovereignty as given but takes the possibility of a systematic error in TV consumption into account. In fact, studies suggest that TV viewing is only rated as below average or just as average enjoyment. American women, surprisingly enough, even rate it behind cleaning (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, p. 250). Moreover, TV is identified as that activity which would be given up first if another activity would require more time (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, pp. 238–239).
We therefore want to study the second view: individuals tend to watch too much TV in the sense that they are afterwards sorry that they devoted so much time to viewing. Moreover, it seems difficult to overcome this weakness of will; many people are dissatisfied with 
1 Schor (1991) shows that the number of working hours in America has risen, and the amount of leisure time has fallen. But the data supporting this view has been criticized by authors using more accurate diary-based time use data, e.g., Robinson and Godbey (1999, pp. 49–53), Kubey and Csikszentmihalyi (1990, p. 22) and Sullivan and Gershuny (2001). 2 Denmark, The Netherlands, Finland, Italy, Belgium, Sweden, Germany (East and West), Czechoslovakia,
Great Britain, Norway, Poland, France, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Canada, USA and Australia. 3 Gershuny (2000), for the same time period, shows an overall increase in leisure time without controlling for 
shifts in structural variables. The countries investigated are Canada, Denmark, The Netherlands, Norway, UK, USA, Hungary, and Finland. 4 Denmark, Finland, Belgium, Sweden, Great Britain, Norway, France, Hungary, Estonia, Slovenia. 5 Age categories vary by country.
286 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


their own past behavior, but nevertheless again and again devote more time to watching TV than, according to their own evaluation, is good for them. The basic hypothesis is thus that TV lends itself to over-consumption.
The main reason is that TV viewing is characterized by immediate benefits and negligible immediate marginal costs. One just has to push a button. In contrast to going to the cinema, the theater or any outdoor activity, there is no need to be appropriately dressed before leaving the house, there is no need to buy a ticket or to reserve a seat in advance. Watching TV does not require any special physical or cognitive abilities (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, p. 173). Unlike other leisure activities, TV viewing does not need to be coordinated with other persons. It is quite possible to sit alone in front of the TV, while other leisure activities, such as tennis or golf, require a partner with similar time availability and similar preferences. As a consequence, watching TV has, compared to other leisure activities, an exceedingly low or nonexistent entry barrier. At the same time, it offers entertainment value and is considered to be one of the best ways of reducing stress. Moreover, while watching TV, immediate marginal costs are even lower and having a remote control is an invitation to ultra short-term optimization (zapping). Many of the costs resulting from such consumption behavior are not experienced immediately, or not predicted at all. The negative effects of not enough sleep, for example, only arise the next day, and the consequences of underinvestment in social contacts, education or career take much longer to appear. An increase in one’s material aspirations might not be foreseen at all. These characteristics of the consumption good induce many individuals to fall prey to excessive TV viewing. Some studies discuss if television can become a habit (Christakis & Zimmerman, 2006) or even an addiction in a medical or psychological sense (Kubey & Czikszentmihalyi, 2002; McIlwraith, 1998).
In all three programs, carefully structured and monitored cultural immersion 
experiences in communities allow students to experience first hand the cultures they are 
learning about and to subsequently analyze their experiences. In two of our three case study 
sites (Teachers for Alaska and the American Indian Project), prospective teachers live for a 
semester in the communities in which they teach. Students in the Chicago program all live 
together in a multiracial and economically diverse northside community and participate in 
structured activities which take them into many of the city's ethnic neighborhoods. An 
important part of these immersion experiences is the use of community people as cultural 
experts (Mahan 1993). In the American Indian project, Navajo dormitory aides, with whom 
student teachers live, help the prospective teachers make friends in the community and 
participate in many community activities such as chapter house meetings, pow-wows, rodeos,
etc. (Willison 1994). In the Chicago program, community members are hired as program 
consultants to introduce teachers to various community resources such as the Mexican Fine 
Arts Center Museum, the People's Music School, and the Puerto Rican Cultural Center. They 
also introduce them to various perspectives, such as what it is like to live on public assistance 
(Russell and Iazetto 1994). In the Alaska program, elders in the village of Minto have been 
hired to introduce prospective teachers to traditional lifestyle patterns in Native Alaskan 
communities (Ongtooguk 1994). In other cases the involvement of prospective teachers with 
community members is more informal. For example, student teachers in the Alaska program 
are encouraged during a one week "dunking" experience in an Athabascan community which 
precedes student teaching to: 


put themselves in roles outside of the classrooms (e.g., community basketball, skin sewing or beading groups, church attendance) and to spend time in such places as the store and post office where people are likely to congregate or share news. We advise our students to seek out the expertise of teacher's aides who live in the community and to make home visits . . . (Noordhoff and Kleinfeld 1993).
While relatively brief community experiences (e.g., day-long bus tours through inner 
city areas) are a common strategy in U. S. teacher education programs, they risk being 
superficial experiences which create what Harry Broudy once called "interested tolerance" at 
best and reinforcement of existing stereotypes at worst. The most effective community 
experiences are sustained efforts to help prospective teachers learn how to interact in 
more authentic ways with parents and other adults from different racial and ethnic 
backgrounds.
To avoid stereotypic responses to different cultural groups, some programs, including 
two of our case study sites (Teachers for Alaska and the American Indian Project), help 
prospective teachers learn how to learn about, and subsequently incorporate into their 
practice, information about their own students, their families, and communities as a starting 
point for teaching and learning (e.g., Mahan, Fortney, and Garcia 1983; Noordhoff and 
Kleinfeld 1993). Both of these programs require a series of activities through which student 
teachers learn about the communities in which they are teaching (e.g., identifying cultural 
norms) and think about the implications of this cultural knowledge for teaching their pupils.
In the American Indian Project, the community activities and analysis of community norms 
and classroom implications continues throughout the student teaching experience and is 
closely monitored by program staff through a journal that students send back to Indiana. In 
Alaska, while student teachers live in their school communities, the structured community 
activities mainly precede the student teaching semester. In the Urban Education Program,
there is also very little emphasis on community experiences during student teaching. Here, as 
in the Teachers for Alaska program, most of the structured community experiences precede 
student teaching.
The Problem of Socialization Through Curriculum and Instruction 
Most of our research has centered on the identification of curricular and instructional 
strategies teacher educators have used to attempt to prepare preservice teachers to teach 
diverse students. Our literature reviews suggest that these strategies are generally organized 
in two ways: either (1) through the infusion approach, which integrates attention to diversity 
throughout the program's various courses and field experiences, or (2) through the 
segregated approach, which treats diversity as the focus of a single course or as a topic in a 
few courses while other components of the program remain untouched. While studies 
indicate a clear preference for the infusion approach, not surprisingly, the segregated 
approach dominates (Gay 1986).
Our analyses of the literature have also identified a tension in the field between 
culture-specific approaches which seek to prepare teachers to teach specific cultural groups 


in particular contexts (e.g., urban Puerto Rican students) and culture-general approaches 
which seek to prepare teachers to be successful in any context that involves cross-cultural 
interactions. The latter approach focuses on identifying and understanding general cognitive 
processes that mediate cross-cultural interactions and emphasizes experiences that people are 
likely to have during cross-cultural encounters. According to Kushner and Brislin (1986),
teachers who experience a culture-general emphasis in their preparation programs: 
would be expected to be more knowledgeable about factors that contribute to cross-cultural misunderstanding, be sensitive to such factors when interacting with students and parents and be able to approach potentially conflicting situations with an awareness and ability to ask questions in such a way that takes culturally determined factors into account (p. 54).
The community-specific and community-controlled approach to teacher education 
advocated in 1976 by a U.S. Office of Education Commission on Teacher Education (Study 
Commission 1976) is an example of the culture-specific approach which seeks to prepare 
teachers to be culturally sensitive and interculturally competent teachers with regard to 
specific groups of students. Here specific communities of people develop teacher education 
experiences which are designed specifically for their own schools and communities. This kind 
of culture-specific preparation for teaching specific groups of students in particular contexts 
(e.g., Navajos) may help develop sensitivities and capabilities among teachers that are useful 
in other cross-cultural contexts (see Willison 1994). The emphasis is on the particular 
contexts into which they are being inducted. All teacher education for diversity efforts can be 
analyzed in terms of the degree to which they emphasize culture-general and culture-specific 
approaches.
Another dimension in which teacher education for diversity efforts vary is the degree 
to which they emphasize interacting with cultures as opposed to studying about cultures.
All programs which seek to prepare teachers to teach diverse students probably include at 
least some direct field experience. In diverse schools and/or communities, programs vary as 
to how much they emphasize these direct experiences and according to the degree to which 
they put their students into contact with students and adults from different cultural 
backgrounds.
Billig (1995) argues that perhaps the most important symbols of national belonging are those of what he calls ‘banal nationalism’ – the almost unnoticed symbols of nationhood that pepper our everyday lives, from coins and maps to the very use of the word ‘we’. In a similar way, we suggested that televisual images and narratives were developing a global equivalent, a ‘banal globalism’. Such imagery, we argued, might be helping to create a sensibility conducive to the cosmopolitan rights and duties of being a ‘global citizen’, by generating a greater sense of both global diversity and global interconnectedness and belonging (Szerszynski and Toogood, 2000; for alternative research, see Savage, Bagnall, Longhurst 2005: ch. 8).
Yet, for all this, the elevated vantage point has also been criticized for its close intertwining with the operation of power. The imperial, ‘god-like’, cartographic gaze involves the surveying of tracts of land from a privileged vantage point, outside and above the quotidian world (Harley 1992). Might the image of the world from space have embedded within it similar encoding of power? Ingold argues that images of the world as a globe always bear meanings of technological mastery over nature (Ingold 2000: ch. 12, also published as Ingold 1993). Ingold distinguishes two ways of conceiving of the environment – in terms of globes (perceived from without) and spheres (experienced and engaged with from within) – and suggests that ‘the movement from spherical to global imagery is also one in which “the world”, as we are taught it exists, is drawn ever further from the matrix of our lived experience’ (Ingold 2000: 211). He describes the shift from the pre-modern to the modern as one from sphere to globe, from cosmology to technology, from practical, sensory engagement to detachment and control (2000: 216). He implies that such images must necessarily distort our relationship with nature, positioning us outside a world conceived as pure, passive matter, on the outer surface of which meaning is actively inscribed by the perceiver (2000: 213). Cosgrove (1994) is more sanguine, but notes that representations of the globe have always played a role in the iconography of worldly power – in terms of monarchical rule, bourgeois intellectual and worldly ambition, and the commercial ambitions of corporations today. He suggests that images such as Earthrise served a similar function in American iconography, underscoring a distinctively American ideal of global harmony, building on the conventions of missionary cartography with its roots in the idea of universal Christendom.
If Ingold is right, then at least some forms of cosmopolitan citizenship may position one outside the world and alienated from it (Sachs 1993). But how might this affect the experience of place? In the early twentieth century, E.M. Forster noted that certain kinds of place appeared nomadic or cosmopolitan in character. He argued that ‘London was a foretaste of this nomadic civilization which is altering human nature so profoundly . . . Under cosmopolitanism 
122 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


. . . we shall receive no help from the earth. Trees and meadows and mountains will only be a spectacle . . .’ (Forster 1931 [1910]: 243). Under the cosmopolitan condition, the implication is that nature itself gets transformed  into a cosmopolitan spectacle comprised of images of trees and meadows  and mountains to be known about, compared, evaluated, possessed, but not, according to Forster, places that can be ‘dwelt within’. We explore this further in the next section.
Place and vision 
One striking feature of the televisual content that we identified in our survey as denoting or connoting the global was that it did not only consist of mimetic images of the blue earth. What Albrow (1996) calls globality was also suggested in a number of other ways. The simultaneous diversity and moral equivalence of all humanity was suggested through images of the ‘family of man’ sharing a global product. The distanced view of the Earth as an interconnected whole was connoted through long, often aerial images of generic ‘global’ environments such as desert, icecap or rainforest, or through images of particular wildlife species that symbolized or indexed the overall state of the environment. The experience of mobility and comparison was implied by images of relatively exotic places that suggested the endless possibilities of global mobility, and by the very experience of televisual ‘flow’ itself. All of these semiotic instances, albeit often in limited or commodified ways, displayed the sort of transformation of perception we might regard as constituting cosmopolitan citizenship: using particular places, humans or non-humans to signify synec-dochally the global as a whole, and inviting comparison between them.14 
Yet is this abstraction from the local and particular fully compatible with dwelling in a locality? Could it be that the development of a more cosmopolitan, citizenly perception of place is at the expense of other modes of appreciating and caring for local environments and contexts? In order to explore these questions we now turn to focus on some more specific visual aspects of cosmopolitan citizenship: the capacity to appreciate and obligation to protect the distinctive visual characteristics of one’s local place. In a related research project we investigated perceptions of local landscape character among different social groups in the coastal plain of West Cumbria in the North of England. As well as trying to determine local residents’ attitudes towards possible extensions of woodland in the area, and testing the Internet as a medium for consultation, the project explored the extent to which residents recognized West Cumbria as an area of coherent landscape character. We conducted focus groups in towns and villages across the area, and held an Internet-based public consultation on landscape character that was made available on public terminals in the area and on the wider Internet.15 
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 123 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


The West Cumbrian coastal plain is of interest, both socially and for its place in what might be called the visual economy of the North of England (see Urry 1995). It is an isolated area, hemmed in by the Irish Sea and the Cumbrian fells, which has relied on single industries, with concomitant periods of economic hardship and social stigma. Its landscape, an historically agricultural one, is marked by traces of formerly important industries – coal mining, iron smelting, ship building, and so on – leaving it problematic in conventional landscape terms, with an intermingling of urban and rural features, and significant areas of disused land. Its status as a landscape to be appreciated in its own right is further compromised by proximity to the highly valued Lake District, and by the presence of high-technology but potentially dangerous industries such as the nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield. Its inhabitants suffer from high average levels of social deprivation, with many social groups left underemployed by the passing of mining and heavy industry; at the same time there are pockets of affluent residents, often professionals who have moved to  the area from outside, to be directly or indirectly employed by the nuclear industry.
Health Service Utilization in the Former Soviet Union 1945 


The surveys also are not sufficiently large to yield meaningful subnational results. For example, the implementation of health insurance has varied among regions in Russia (Twigg 1999) and it is highly likely that similar differences exist elsewhere.
The data confirm the impression that, while some countries have managed to maintain access to some form of care for most people, in others the situation is near to collapsing. In Belarus, a country that has undergone very little economic reform and has retained many features of the Soviet system (Karnitski 1997), albeit in a situation of sustained economic decline and increasing isolation, health services remain affordable for virtually everyone. Two-thirds of households stated that they never had to do without health care because of cost, and this is in a country where the threshold for seeking care is much lower than in other countries. In contrast, in Georgia, a country that has suffered a civil war andwhere the government is not in control of some regions (Gamkredlidze et al. 2003), only 14 percent of households report never having to do without care because of cost. Access to care also seems to have remained generally affordable in Russia, by far the largest and wealthiest of the countries included. The pattern of affordability of drugs is similar to that of access to care. Problems are less frequent in Russia and Belarus, but few households in Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, or Moldova are entirely free of problems.
When the aggregate figures are broken down according to the characteristics of respondents it is apparent that there are substantial inequalities in each country. Thus, in Georgia and Armenia, among those in the group with fewest household assets, about two-thirds of respondents had not sought care despite being ill because they could not afford it. While the multivariate analysis confirms how, taking account of other variables, those with fewest resources are most disadvantaged, it also shows that financial resources are not the only factor and others, such as social support systems, play a role, an issue that will be returned to later.
In most countries the referral system appears to have remained intact, with most people receiving care in their local or workplace primary care facility. The exception is Georgia, where a relatively high proportion of the most recent visits have been in hospitals. This provides further evidence of the breakdown of the Georgian health system (Gamkredlidze et al. 2003). This impression receives more support from the question on paying for care, with two-thirds of Georgian respondents paying or making a gift during their most recent consultation. Once again, the lowest figure is in Belarus, at fewer than 10 percent. Other work has shown that the phenomenon of informal payment is extremely complex,with its nature varying according to context (Balabanova 
1946 HSR: Health Services Research 39:6, Part II (December 2004) 


and McKee 2002). Consequently, it is not possible to understand fully what is happening from a survey such as this. Instead, there is a need formore detailed qualitative and quantitative research on this subject. It is also of interest to note that, despite the considerable variation in the frequency of paying in different countries, when faced with a hypothetical situation of being unable to obtain necessary treatment, the proportion of respondents saying they would either pay or use connections is relatively similar. Earlier work in Russia has shown the importance of using connections to obtain health care, especially among the higher socioeconomic groups, although the situation is not entirely clearcut, as some less well-off families benefit by having a family member who is, for example, a driver for a senior doctor (Brown and Rusinova 1997). This social stratification is also apparent in the present study. While 25 percent of those with insufficient resources for nutrition would use connections, 53 percent of those with sufficient resources for luxuries would do so. As might be expected, those who are members of organizations are more likely to say they would use connections than those who are not (44 percent versus 35 percent). Unsurprisingly, there is also a difference in the proportion of respondents who would pay, although the gap is narrower, at 24 percent and 40 percent, respectively.
Research Preview, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute  of Justice, April 1998, FS 000203.
5. See Reiss, Albert J., Jr., “Systematic Observations of Natural Social Phenomena,” Sociological Methodology, vol. 3, ed. Herbert Costner, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1971: 3–33.
6. The face block is the block segment on one side of a street only. Thus, the buildings across the street from one another on any block count, for observation purposes, as two units.
7. For more details of the way collective efficacy was defined and measured, see Sampson, Raudenbush, and Earls, “Neighborhoods and Violent Crime.”  
Findings and conclusions of the research reported here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice.
The National Institute of Justice is a  component of the Office of Justice  Programs, which also includes the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime.
NCJ 186049This and other NIJ publications can be found at and downloaded from  the NIJ Web site (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij).
Predictors of the High PA Trajectory 
Table III presents the correlations among the demographic measures and among the family functioning and parenting measures. ANOVA’s were conducted to examine whether higher and lower risk status were associated differentially with parenting and family functioning.
Table IV reports the prevalence of each risk factor by trajectory group. Note that the prevalence levels generally increase from the low- to the medium- to the high-aggression trajectory groups. For all predictors, the high 
group has the highest prevalence of family risk characteristics, the highest scores on hostile parenting and family functioning (higher score indicating more dysfunction), and the lowest scores on positive and consistent parenting.
Table V reports the results of the logistic regression analysis aimed at identifying risk factors distinguishing the high aggression trajectory group in the context of a multivariate model. In the first model, only the sex of the child and family characteristics were entered. The results indicated that the largest risk for a high PA trajectory was being a male (OR: 1.67). The next two largest risks were a low family income (OR: 1.45) and low maternal education (OR: 1.20). In the second model, we added the family processes variables. The results indicate that the significant effects of sex, income and maternal education remained significant. In addition, we found hostile/ineffective parenting to be a strong predictor of membership in the high PA trajectory. None of the interactions between sex and the predictors were significant.
DISCUSSION 
This study is the first to report on the development of physical aggression among a large nationally 


80 Coˆte´, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc, Nagin, and Tremblay 
Table III. Bivariate Associations (Correlations or Anovas) Among Predictor Variables (See Note Below) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1. Sex of Child — 2. Early motherhood −.013 — 3. Low income 0.00 0.31∗ — 4. Low education 0.04∗∗ 0.28∗∗ 0.31∗∗ — 5. Separated family 0.00 0.28∗∗ 0.39∗∗ 0.23∗∗ — 6. Positive parenting 2.10 6.52∗ 13.71∗∗ 8.05 ∗ 1.51 — 7. Hostile/ineffective parenting 55.58∗∗ 0.21 14.17∗∗ 14.91∗∗ 7.6∗∗ −0.19∗∗ — 8. Consistency in parenting 0.99 45.94∗∗ 54.29∗∗ 205.1∗∗ 14.37∗∗ 0.07∗∗ −0.27∗∗ — 9. Family functioning 4.13 93.24∗∗ 94.55∗∗ 171.08∗∗ 100.03∗∗ −0.21∗∗ 0.21∗∗ −0.21∗∗ 
Note. ANOVAS were conducted to measure the associations between the categorical and continuous predictors. F values are presented. ∗p < .05.∗∗p < .001.
representative sample, with data on both sexes, from two to 11 years of age. Using a group-based trajectory methodology, we modeled the development of PA among more than 10,000 children assessed four times over 6 years. We found that occasional use of physical aggression was frequent among preschool children, and that a minority used PA more frequently. Toddlers with occasional or infrequent use of PA followed declining trajectories, while those who used it frequently were at risk of remaining on a high-level trajectory throughout childhood. Children in the high PA trajectory group were more likely to be boys, from low income families, with mothers who had not completed high school and who reported using hos-tile/ineffective parenting strategies. These results from a representative Canadian sample of children are in line with a recent large US study (NICHD ECCRN, 2004) covering a similar age range and showing that physical aggression tends to be more stable in the context of family adversity.
The present study addressed five important questions concerning the development of physical aggression. First, we found that at the earliest assessment, in toddlerhood, PA was part of most children’s behavioral repertoire, but that the typical developmental trajectory was one of declining frequency of use. Specifically, the moderate-desister group represented 52.2% of children with occasional use of PA in toddlerhood who desisted to infrequent use by 11 years. The low-level desister group represented 31.1% of children who exhibited infrequent use in toddlerhood and virtually no PA by 11 years. The overall pattern of results for the shape of the development trajectories is similar to that found in the NICHD ECCRN (2004) study, where most children were also found to exhibit low to moderate levels of PA and to be following declining trajectories between toddlerhood and middle childhood. One difference between the NICHD ECCRN trajectory results and the present results is the number of groups identified.
Boulerice, B. (2001). General Nonlinear Mixtures of Curves (MOC). Statistical software program. http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/R/CRAN/.
Boyle, M. H., Offord, D. R., Hofmann, H. G., Catlin, G. P., Byles, G. A., Cadman, D. T., et al. (1987). Ontario child care study: I Methodology. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 826–831.
Brame, B., Nagin, D. S., & Tremblay, R. E. (2001). Developmental trajectories of physical aggression from school entry to late adolescence. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 389–394.
Broidy, L. M., Nagin, D. S., Tremblay, R. E., Brame, B., Dodge, K., Fergusson, D., et al. (2003). Developmental trajectories of childhood disruptive behaviors and adolescent delinquency: A six site, cross national study. Developmental Psychology, 39, 222–245.
Cairns, R. B. (1979). The analysis of social interactions: Method, results and illustrations. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cairns, R. B., Cairns, B. D., Neckerman, H. J., Ferguson, L. L., & Garie´py, J. L. (1989). Growth and aggression: 1. Childhood to early adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 25, 320–330.
A fundamental problem with these measures is that the items are  
constructed so that they make assumptions about technology:  
· Assumptions about sensory channels supported by the technology (display  
devices) (i.e., “How well did you see the other.” “I could see the other on the  
screen.”)  
· Assumptions about input devices (i.e., “The other listened to what I said.”  
Assumes audio input).
· Assumptions about the virtual environment. (i.e., “I felt close to the others in  
the virtual room.”)  
These items and measures constructed from them cannot be easily  
generalized to use with other media. They effectively preclude cross-media  


    
30  
comparisons, and therefore defeat one of the key goals of the social presence  
theory and research, the evaluation and relative effectiveness of social presence  
technologies or interface techniques.
Overcoming limitations in the range of social interactions that can be  
accommodated by a measure of social presence  
Much research on social presence is done in settings in which impression  
formation or organizational tasks such as collaboration are the norm. As a result,
some theories and measures assume a specific class of interactions: collaboration,
task performance, creating attraction and liking, and so forth. If the measurement  
of social presence is tailored to a specific kind of goal, social interaction, or task,
then the same measures cannot be used to measure social presence in other types  
of interactions, goals, or tasks. For example, is it not possible to feel that the other  
is very socially present in hostile or competitive interactions such as those found in  
some computer games? If someone is five feet from you in a immersive virtual  
environment, sneering, and pointing a gun directly at your head, can we say that  
the individual was not “socially present” because the measure indicated that you,
Despite the apparent failure of the Flemish anchoring strategy to fundamentally  reconstitute Flemish economic space, it clearly belongs to a long-term and ongoing  historical attempt to rescale economic relations and institutionalize an autonomous  Flemish space for strategizing, interest formation and governance in Belgium. This is  contributing to the further disintegration of Belgian political space as Flemings try to  


 29  
remove the burden of the financial transfers from Flanders to Wallonia caused by its  economic crisis and the strength of the Walloon socialist party and trade union. Thus  the Flemish economic region-building agenda essentially aims to create a more  favourable site of accumulation by eliminating an uncompetitive one. The  institutionalization of the Flemish space economy therefore generates a new spatial  and institutional fix, deferring the crisis-tendencies of global capitalism (literally)  beyond its own boundaries, i.e. into Wallonia. This allows Flanders, at least for now,  to better address the competitive pressures of the global market by allowing it to  insert the Flemish space economy more favourably than the Belgian space economy  into the global strategies of capital. The creation of Flemish ‘institutional thickness’  (Martin 2000) involves more than creating business assets and competitive  institutional arrangements, as soft economic sociologists would have it, and extends  to shifting the geographies of capitalist political economy.
Conclusions    
Grossberg, a leading figure in cultural studies, argued that political economy cannot  be relied on to develop the potential of the cultural turn, even when it takes the latter  seriously, which is rare enough. For it ‘always assumes a universal privilege (and a  decontextualized singularity) of the economy over politics and culture’ (2006: 19).  Instead he recommends that the initiative be taken by scholars within cultural studies.  Specifically, it should  
• engage with economics as discipline and not just with a preferred theorist  or theorists;   
• address the concrete complexities of economic life, relations and  discourses and not just treat theory as an adequate description of economic  contexts;   
• get involved in collaborative work across disciplines rather than retreat into  its own disciplinary boundaries; and   
• not unreflectively privilege forms of academic knowledge and knowledge  production (2006: 20-21).
We would respond that political economy should follow the same recommendations.  Thus scholars of political economy should   


 30  
• engage with cultural studies as a whole and not just with one preferred  theorist or school,
• address the complexities of semiosis and explore the discursive and  material mechanisms that shape the manner and extent to which ‘ideas  matter’ in political economy rather than merely asserting that they do and/or  illustrating this with simple narrative accounts,
• commit themselves to trans-disciplinary interaction or, better, sui generis  post-disciplinary research rather than mechanically additive ‘multidisciplinary’ team work (on different forms of disciplinarity, see Jessop and  Sum 2001), and  
• not unreflectively privilege forms of academic knowledge and knowledge  production but examine in particular common sense economic imaginaries  and actually existing struggles over their selection and retention.
  
The approach to CPE sketched above is one way to respond to these challenges.  Indeed, it would seem to correspond almost perfectly to the research agenda set for  cultural studies by Grossberg in his provocative call to theoretical arms:    
Doing a different kind of – conjunctural – economics involves recognizing  that the economy is not only overdetermined but also multiple, relational  and discursive. For example, if we are to demystify both economies and  economics, we probably need to recognize at least four distinct  problematics: (1) economism, or the assumption that the economy (whether  we understand as a mode of production, class conflicts, entrepreneurialism,  technology, finance or markets) is the motor force of history, has to be  criticized with the concept of overdetermination; (2) capitalocentrism -- or  the assumption that capitalism in a singular and singularly ubiquitous  formation, has to be replaced with a recognition of the multiplicity, not only  of capitalisms but also of economic practices and formations (Gibson-Graham 1996); (3) productivism or the assumption that production is the  essence of economies and therefore, the fundamental; or even the only real  source of value, has to be replaced by a recognition of the dispersion and  contingency of value; and finally (4) economic essentialism or the  assumption that there is a stable and universal distinction between  


 31  
economic and non-economic practices or relations, has to be replaced by a  recognition, not merely that economic relations are themselves partly  discursive, but also that the economic is always a relationally produced  category (Grossberg 2006: 21).
even with the danger of consumer panic. Recent experience with the mature US banking 
system, however, shows that an adequate provision of liquidity by the central bank can 
prevent such potential damage. After September 11, 2001, the Federal Reserve at one 
point injected more than $ 100 billion in additional liquidity (Lacker 2004).
7. Foreign trade. Terrorist activities can affect foreign trade in several ways. First, the 
costs of doing business are raised by a general increase in insecurity as a result of 
terrorism. Second, augmented security measures in response to a terrorist campaign 
increase transaction costs. Third, there is the risk of a direct destruction of traded goods.
The repeated attacks on oil pipelines in Iraq after the fall of Saddam Hussein, which 
temporarily paralyzed oil exports, are a recent example of the latter risk. Another 
example is the attack launched on the French supertanker “Limburg” off Yemen’s coast 
in October 2002. In many countries one of the largest export industries is the tourism 
industry. As already discussed, this industry is directly affected by terrorism.
Nitsch and Schumacher (2004) use an extended gravity model, containing the 
conventional determinants and, in addition, the annual number of international terrorist 
attacks in a country to assess the impact of terrorism on trade between more than 200 
countries for the period 1968 to 1979. According to their results, countries targeted by 
terrorism trade significantly less with each other than countries not affected by terrorism.
Moreover, the effect is economically large: a doubling of the number of terrorist incidents 
reduces the bilateral trade flows by 4%.
8. Urban economy. Terrorism may influence the relative advantage of living in a city 
compared to living in the countryside, and may thus affect urbanization: cities can exploit 
the positive economies of scale of defending their population. At the same time, the high 


- 16 -

population density makes cities an attractive target for terrorists. Finally, violence and 
terrorism raise transport costs. Transport costs can be substituted by closer physical 
vicinity. The last two influences are most relevant for modern terrorism, but they point in 
opposite directions. An analysis of the population development in London, Jerusalem and 
Tel Aviv indicates that terrorism has had little if any impact. Despite the relative safety of 
Tel Aviv, its population growth over the past 50 years actually lags behind that of 
Jerusalem (Glaeser and Shapiro 2002). Similarly, cross-country evidence suggests that 
the overall impact of terrorism on urbanization is likely to be small. Glaeser and Shapiro 
(2002) regress a dummy variable that indicates whether a country experienced terrorism 
in the period 1968 to 1977 and, alternatively, the log number of terrorist incidents in this 
period on the extent of urbanization in 1978 and the number of skyscrapers built. While 
there is a positive relationship between terrorism and the extent of urbanization, Glaeser 
and Shapiro (2002) assert that “this link is small, statistically weak, and causally dubious” 
(p. 223). No evidence is found for an effect of terrorism on the number of tall buildings 
built in a country.11 
Various studies have estimated the economic effects of the terrorist attacks on September 
11, 2001. The direct costs consist of the destruction of infrastructure and human capital.
2002), and embodied agents (Cassell, Sullivan et al., 2000).
Although understanding social presence is sometimes the goal of research  
where this concept is employed, more frequently social presence research is a  
means to explore some aspect of technology or the effects of technology.
Communication and human-computer interaction researchers are typically  
interested in social presence because it may mediate the effects of other variables  
of central concern to the researcher such as attitudes towards the mediated  
others, features of the interface, persuasion, illusions of reality, learning and  
memory, and mental health (Bailenson, 2001; Choi, 2000; Nowak, submitted;  
Turkle, 1997).
The need for a well-explicated theory arises not only because researchers  
need to understand the role of social presence in human-to-human and human-

computer interaction, but also because continued research in this area needs to  
bring conceptual clarity to what is currently a rather amorphous set of variables,
many of which are being equated or conflated with social presence. Moreover, if we  
better understand social presence, then this may guide ways to operationalize it  


    
3  
such that it is an empirical variable amenable to reliable and valid measurement.
Thus, development of a systematic theory will in turn enable development of  
appropriate measures of social presence as conceptualized. Valid measures can be  
selected and differentiated from measures of other concepts.
In an attempt to mitigate this state of affairs, recent research, guided by the first two assumptions, has focused on helping science teachers develop desired understandings of the NOS (Aguirere, Haggerty, & Linder, 1990; Bloom, 1989; Brickhouse, 1989, 1990; Brickhouse & Bodner, 1992; Briscoe, 1991; Gallagher, 1991; King, 1991; Koulaidis & Ogborn, 1989). This line of research is particularly based on the assumption that teachers’ conceptions directly translate into their teaching practices. This assumption, while intuitive, has not been validated by empirical research (Lederman & Druger, 1985; Lederman & Zeidler, 1987; Palmquist & Finley, 1997; Mellado, 1997; Tobin & McRobbie, 1997).
In fact, a growing body of research indicates that the relationship between teachers’ conceptions and their classroom practice is far from being direct or simple. For instance, Gess-Newsome and Lederman (1995) found that the translation of experienced high school teachers’ conceptions of their subject matter into their teaching could be direct, limited by other variables, or absent. The authors identified six variables that seemed to mediate such translation, including teacher intentions, content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, students’ needs, teacher autonomy, and time. Additionally, Smith and Neale (1989) reported that elementary science teachers’ content knowledge, as well as their concerns with classroom management and organization, were significant factors in mediating the translation of their beliefs about science into classroom practices.
Similar results are evident in research focusing on the translation of teachers’ conceptions of the NOS into classroom practice. In general, this research has indicated that the relationship between teachers’ beliefs about the NOS and their classroom practice is more complex than originally assumed. Several constraining factors have been reported, including pressure to cover content (Duschl & Wright, 1989; Hodson, 1993), classroom management and organizational principles (Hodson, 1993; Lantz & Kass, 1987; Lederman, 1995), concerns for student abilities and motivation (Brickhouse & Bodner, 1992; Duschl & Wright, 1989; Lederman, 1995), institutional constraints (Brickhouse & Bodner, 1992), and teaching experience (Brickhouse & Bodner, 1992; Lederman, 1995). It is noteworthy that most of the constraints reported in these studies were inferred as possible explanations for the lack of instructional emphasis on the NOS rather than being directly articulated by the participant teachers.
As far as teaching the NOS is concerned, the aforementioned third assumption has recently been recognized. Much of the curricula of the 1960s and 1970s emphasized hands-on, inquiry activities. It was reasoned that by “doing science” students would also come to understand the NOS. The assumption underlying these curricular efforts was that the NOS can be learned implicitly as opposed to requiring explicit attention. However, research studies that focused on the effectiveness of the 1960s and 1970s curricula have consistently indicated that students did not develop the desired understandings of the NOS (Durkee, 1974; Tamir, 1972; Trent, 1965; Troxel, 1968). In short, research has not lend support to the assumption that the NOS can be learned implicitly. The importance of teaching the NOS explicitly provided primary guidance for this investigation.
Given the aforementioned apparent complexity of the relationship between teachers’ conceptions and their teaching practices, it should prove fruitful to explore preservice teachers’ conceptions of the NOS and their translation into classroom practice. The purpose of this study was to elucidate 


420 ABD-EL-KHALICK ET AL.
SCE (WILEJ) LEFT INTERACTIVE 
short standard long 
the relationship of preservice teachers’ conceptions of the NOS with their planning and student teaching. The main questions of the investigation were: 
1. What are preservice science teachers’ conceptions of the NOS prior to student teaching? 2. Do preservice teachers emphasize the NOS in their planning and/or teaching? 3. What are the factors that explain preservice teachers’ emphasis on the NOS in their teaching?

 1  
Cultural Political Economy: on Making the Cultural Turn without Falling into  Soft Economic Sociology    
Bob Jessop and Stijn Oosterlynck    
Abstract: This article explores the implications of making the cultural turn in the  engagement of economic and political geography with issues of political economy. It  seeks to steer a path between a fetishistic, reified economics that naturalizes  economic categories and a soft economic sociology that focuses on the similarities  between economic and other socio-cultural activities at the expense of the specificity  of the economic. We show how combining critical semiotic analysis with an  evolutionary and institutional approach to political economy offers one interesting  way to achieve this goal. An evolutionary and institutional approach to semiosis  enables us to recognize the semiotic dimensions of political economy at the same  time as establishing how and why only some economic imaginaries among the many  that circulate actually come to be selected and institutionalized; and Marxian political  economy enables us to identify the contradictions and conflicts that make capital  accumulation inherently improbable and crisis-prone, creating the space for  economic imaginaries to play a role in stabilizing accumulation in specific spatiotemporal fixes and/or pointing the way forward from recurrent crises. The paper  illustrates these arguments with a case study on the Flemish ‘anchoring debate’ as a  specific regional economic development strategy. It concludes with a set of  guidelines for the further development of cultural political economy.
Key words: Semiosis; critical discourse analysis; hegemony; cultural political  economy; Belgium; accumulation strategy; state project; nationalism; regionalization;    
Bob Jessop is Professor of Sociology and Director of the Institute for Advanced  Studies at Lancaster University.   Stijn Oosterlynck is a post-doctoral research associate in the School of Geography,  Manchester University.


 2  
Cultural Political Economy: on Making the Cultural Turn without Falling into  Soft Economic Sociology    
This contribution aims to redirect the cultural turn(s) in economic and political  geography by making and illustrating the case for a distinctive approach to ‘cultural  political economy’ (hereafter CPE refers to this approach and not to the wider set of  cultural turns in political economy).1 This combines concepts and tools from critical  semiotic analysis with others from critical political economy to produce a distinctive  post-disciplinary approach to the analysis of capitalist social formations (cf. Jessop  and Sum 2001). While it is not demonstrated here, CPE can also be applied to noncapitalist economic and political orders by combining a critical analysis of the  production of intersubjective meaning (i.e., semiosis) with concepts suited to such  orders and their institutional dynamics. One of the key differences between CPE and  other approaches that make a cultural turn is its explicit integration of the general  evolutionary mechanisms of variation, selection, and retention into semiotic analysis  and, in particular, its concern with the path-dependent co-evolution of the semiotic  and extra-semiotic aspects of actually existing political economies. In other words,  we take for granted the path-shaping potential of economic imaginaries (in their  different forms and varying content) and seek to explain why only some economic  imaginaries among the many that circulate actually come to be selected and  institutionalized and thereby come to co-constitute economic subjectivities, interests,  activities, organizations, institutions, structural ensembles, emergent economic  orders and their social embedding, and the dynamics of economic performance. We  also emphasize that these general evolutionary mechanisms are mediated in and  through the distinctive forms and institutional dynamics of capitalism (or other forms  of political economy) as well as through the general features of semiosis. Indeed, it  seems that the relative importance of institutional materiality increases from the stage  of variation in economic and political imaginaries through the stage when they are  selectively translated into specific material practices and institutional dynamics to the  stage when they are embodied in a structurally coherent set of social relations and a  spatio-temporal fix compatible with continued accumulation (see below).
The strikes against the Unity Law fused reactions to this regional uneven economic  development with the ongoing territorialization of the language conflict. The Unity  Law was proposed in 1960 by the government of the Flemish Christian-democrat  Eyskens. It envisaged drastic cuts in social expenditures and higher indirect taxation  to finance industrial modernisation and economic expansion, which were deemed  necessary to overcome the long-term economic crisis (Eyskens 1988; Witte 1997).  The proposal triggered a five-week general strike, paralysing industry in Wallonia and  spreading to the Flemish ports of Antwerp and Ghent. The strike’s centre of gravity  was in the heavy industries and in Wallonia. While the Christian trade union ACV,  which is dominant in Flanders, supported ‘their’ minister, the ill-prepared Flemish  socialist trade unionists and national socialist party never recognized the strike.  Disillusioned by the Flemish reluctance to participate in the strike, some Walloon  strike leaders despaired at what they saw as the stranglehold of a Flemish  conservative and catholic parliamentary majority. In a decisive turn, they campaigned  for the tools to pursue autonomous reforms of the Walloon industrial structure and  thereby initiated the fusion of regional and labour movement struggles. This gave a  decisive political-economic content to divisions that had previously been expressed in  Wallonia in terms of Flemish ‘encroachment’ on the status of the French language.  This shift also led to a turn from defence of the linguistic status quo to an offensive  strategy to advance Walloon politico-economic interests in the new conjuncture.
This conjuncturally-determined fusion of the Walloon working classes and the  Walloon federalist movement was decisive in shaping the contrasting imaginaries  that came to inform Flemish and Walloon regionalisation strategies. In sum, the  combined force of regional uneven economic development and territorialization of the  language conflict triggered political and economic communitarianism on regional  lines. This shift gradually led to Belgium’s legal transformation from a unitary into a  federal state between 1970 and 1993 (Van Istendael 1993) and provides the context  for the Flemish anchoring debate. This is one of the most important debates  concerning Flemish economic strategies in the last two decades and we now show  


 21  
how the cultural and institutional resources developed during two centuries of Belgian  history have been (and are still being) articulated into two economic imaginaries as  competing bases for constructing the Flemish regional space economy.
The anchoring debate    
In the late 1980s Belgium’s traditional welcome to multinational capital turned to fear  about losing economic self-determination. This crystallised in the Belgian anchoring  debate, triggered when the main Belgian holding company, Société Générale  (hereafter SG), suffered a share raid in January 1988 by Carlo de Benedetti, an  Italian investor. The debate concerned whether national decision-making power over  the economic infrastructure is desirable and necessary to maintain a strong economy  and fund welfare (Brockmans 1995, Daems and Van de Weyer 1993, Geens 1995).  In this sense it turned on competing conceptions of the Belgian economy, its insertion  into the European, Atlantic, and global economic order, the changing nature of  economic competitiveness and its extra-economic conditions of existence, and the  extent to which the ‘Belgian condition’ involved distinctive constraints and  opportunities on the pursuit of national and regional economic strategies. What gave  the anchoring debate its specificity in a period of general concern about the ability of  national states to manage national economies in the interests of national citizens (cf.  Jessop 2002) was, of course, the relative fragility of the Belgian state, economy, and  sense of citizenship due to the changing articulation of the religious, linguistic, and  territorial issues as well as the nature of Belgian bourgeoisie and other classes.
Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman (1994). Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No Number? Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(4): 45-64.
Downes-Le Guin, Theodore and Bruce Hoffman (1993). The Impact of Terrorism on Public Opinion, 1988 
to 1989. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Drakos, Konstantinos (2004). Terrorism-Induced Structural Shifts in Financial Risk: Airline Stocks in the 
Aftermath of the September 11th Terror Attacks. European Journal of Political Economy 20(2): 435-446.
Drakos, Konstantinos and Ali M. Kutan (2003). Regional Effects of Terrorism on Tourism in Three 
Mediterranean Countries. Journal of Conflict Resolution 47(5): 621-641.
Eckstein, Zvi and Daniel Tsiddon (2004). Macroeconomic Consequences of Terror: Theory and the Case of Israel. Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Economist (2004). Calculating Tragedy: September 11th Compensation. Economist, June 26, 2004: 84-85.
Mutual understanding. Most mediated social interactions occur over time,
therefore the mental model of the other and the sense of social presence must be  
evolving and not fixed. The logic suggests that there should evolve some sense  
that the observer has some understanding of the other. In cases of higher social  
presence this understanding might be mutual. For Savicki (Savicki and Kelley, 2000)  
the definition of social presence emphasizes the ability to project a sense of self  
through the limitations of a medium. Emphasizing this dimension of social presence,
Nowak (Nowak, 2000) used the measure of “homophilly,” or perceived similarity in  
emotions and attitudes, to measure social presence. Implied in this approach is  
some level of mutual understanding negotiated through the limitations of a  
medium.
Behavioral engagement  
Social interaction involves behavior. Some definitions of social presence  
include implicit or explicit references to some level of behavioral engagement,
especially behavioral interaction or synchronization either as the essence or an  
indicator of social presence. The emphasis on interactive behavior is a more recent  


    
19  
component of social presence theories. Most social presence research, until the  
mid-1990s, dealt primarily with low bandwidth media, textual media, or  
teleconferencing systems (e.g., Short, Williams et al., 1976; Steinfield, 1986; Rice  
and Love, 1987; Rice, 1992; Walther, 1992; Walther and Burgoon, 1992; Rice,
1993; Walther, Anderson et al., 1994; Rice and Tyler, 1995; Walther, 1996;  
Tidwell and Walther, 2000). Therefore, behavioral variation was limited and rarely  
extended beyond text-based verbal behavior and a narrow range of non-verbal  
communication behaviors. Most tasks such as text chat were highly symbolic and  
relied heavily on verbal interaction. Nonetheless, while social presence like presence  
itself is largely a phenomenal state, it is sometimes defined as including a behavioral  
component. Reference is made to levels of behavioral engagement such as eye  
contract, non-verbal mirroring, turn taking, etc.

TILTING THEORY AND CLUSTER COMBINATORICS 
ASLAK BAKKE BUAN, ROBERT MARSH, MARKUS REINEKE, IDUN REITEN, AND GORDANA TODOROV 
Abstract. We introduce a new category C, which we call the cluster category, obtained as a quotient of the bounded derived category D of the module category of a finite-dimensional hereditary algebra H over a field. We show that, in the simply-laced Dynkin case, C can be regarded as a natural model for the combinatorics of the corresponding Fomin–Zelevinsky cluster algebra. In this model, the tilting objects correspond to the clusters of Fomin–Zelevinsky. Using approximation theory, we investigate the tilting theory of C, showing that it is more regular than that of the module category itself, and demonstrating an interesting link with the classification of self-injective algebras of finite representation type. This investigation also enables us to conjecture a generalisation of APR-tilting.
Introduction 
In this paper, we introduce a new category, which we call the cluster category, associated with any finite dimensional hereditary algebra H over a field k. This is defined as the quotient C of the bounded derived category D of finitely generated modules over H by the functor F = τ−1[1], where τ denotes the AR-translation and [1] denotes the shift functor. The category C is triangulated, by a result of Keller [Kel03], and we show that it is also a Krull-Schmidt category. Our main aims are to show how this category can be used to study the tilting theory of H (and related algebras) and to show that it can be used as a model for the combinatorics of an associated Fomin–Zelevinsky [FZ02a] cluster algebra.
Hom-configurations are certain collections of non-isomorphic indecomposable objects in D, and were considered in [Rie80a] in connection with the classification of self-injective algebras of finite representation type. We formulate analogous conditions using Ext1 instead of Hom, and call the resulting collections Ext-configurations. We show that they exhibit a behaviour similar to that of Hom-configurations. In particular, they are invariant under the functor F (compare [BLR81], where it is shown that Hom-configurations exhibit a similar kind of invariance in the Dynkin case). As a consequence we can show that they are in 1–1 correspondence with what we call basic cluster-tilting objects in C (or tilting objects, for short). By showing that a basic tilting object in C is induced by a basic tilting module over some hereditary algebra derived equivalent to H , we prove 
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 16G20, 16G70; Secondary 16S99, 17B99. Key words and phrases. APR tilting theory, tilting module, Hom-configuration, Ext-

configuration, complement, approximation theory, self-injective algebra, cluster algebra. Aslak Bakke Buan was supported by a grant from the Norwegian Research Council. Robert 
Marsh was supported by a Leverhulme Fellowship, study leave from the University of Leicester, EPSRC grant GR/R17547/01, NSF funding through a research grant of A. Zelevinsky and support from the Norwegian Research Council.
1 


2 BUAN, MARSH, REINEKE, REITEN, AND TODOROV 
that Ext-configurations, like Hom-configurations in the Dynkin case, are induced by basic tilting modules.
The category C provides an interesting “extension” of the module category of H . It is known that any almost complete basic tilting module T over H can be completed to a basic tilting module in at most two different ways [RS90, Ung90] and in exactly two different ways if and only if T is sincere [HU89]. However, in the extended category C, the behaviour is more regular: an almost complete basic tilting object always has exactly two complements. We show further that, given one complement M to an almost complete basic tilting object T , the other can be constructed using approximation theory from [AS80]. Indeed, we show that there is a triangle 
M∗ → B →M →M∗[1] 
in C, where B → M is a minimal right addT -approximation of M in C and M∗ is the other complement to T . Dually, there is a triangle 
M → B′ →M∗ →M [1] 
in C. In fact, we are able to show that two indecomposable objectsM andM∗ form such an exchange pair if and only if 
dimEnd(M) Ext 1 C(M,M 
∗) = 1 = dimEnd(M∗) Ext 1 C(M 
∗,M).
A way to integrate the equally important needs for a balanced training set and correct 
against possible selection bias is to provide the network with prior knowledge of the actual 
distribution of classes’ occurrence.  This prior knowledge should be able to correct the weight 


13 
estimates produced by the balanced training set without affecting the network’s ability to learn 
equally from both classes.  Unfortunately, it is hard to incorporate prior knowledge into neurally 
based classifiers (Barnard and Botha 1993).  In neural networks, information about input-output 
relations is distributed across multiple weight values making the direct correction of the weight 
with a priori probabilities of class membership nearly impossible.13  Since it is so difficult to 
manipulate the weight values directly, we need new types of correction mechanisms that are both 
efficient and easy to apply.  An alternative approach to incorporate prior knowledge is to use a 
cross-validation set reproducing the frequency of the rare event in the population, Ƭ.14  This 
makes it possible to “correct” the value of all the weights in the network in a distributed way,
while allowing the network to produce weight values that focus on both classes.
How does this cross-validation correction strategy work to intervene on the weight values 
calculated by the training set?  The function of cross-validation is to stop the training when the 
prediction error in the cross-validation set, MSE, reaches a predefined local minimum.15  Thus,
when a balanced training set is used together with an unbalanced cross-validation set, a double 
divergent process on the error minimization calculation occurs.  On the one hand, the error 
minimization process in the training will be shaped by both classes, since the training set is 
balanced.  The network‘s search for the optimal weights would be executed on the basis of a 
minimal error that takes into consideration the correct prediction in both classes.  On the other 
hand, an early stop in the training process is determined by the reduction of the error in the cross-

validation sample.  Since the more dominant class in the sample is the non-conflict class, training 
ends when the prediction in this class reaches its minimum error.  The goal is to select the 
combination of weights that equally improves the prediction result on both classes but, at the 
same time, can offer the best prediction on the more dominant class of the population.16  


14 
By experimenting on the double levels of the error minimization process (one level 
supervising the weight change and the other determining the end of the training) the balanced 
training set with cross-validation correction strategy can solve some of the problems that rare 
event prediction, specifically conflict prediction, presents to neural network models.17    
Variables and Analysis 
The network inputs include MIDs as the dependent variable, and eight dyadic 
independent variables.  Our theoretical perspective is that of the Kantian research program,
addressed to the system of directed and reciprocal relations among democracy, economic 
interdependence, international organizations, and militarized conflict or the lack thereof, as laid 
out in Russett and Oneal (2001).  Consistent with the view that liberal states carry on relations 
with each other differently from their power-oriented relations with other states, the analysis 
includes five variables usually associated with realist analysis, and three “Kantian” variables 
(www.yale.edu/unsy/democ/democ1.htm).  The realist variables include Allies, a binary measure 
coded 1 if the members of a dyad are linked by any form of military alliance.  Contig is also 
binary, coded 1 if both state are geographically contiguous, and Logdistance is an interval 
measure of the distance between the two states’ capitals.  Majorpow is a binary variable coded 
one if either or both states in the dyad is a major power, and Logcaprat measures the dyadic 
balance of power on an interval scale.  The first Kantian variable, DemL, is a 21-point scale for 
the level of democracy in the less democratic state in each dyad.  DependL is a continuous 
variable measuring the level of economic interdependence (dyadic trade as a portion of a state’s 
gross domestic product) of the less economically dependent state in the dyad.  IGO measures the 
number of international organizations in which the two states share membership.  Most of these 
measures (e.g., MIDs, alliances, contiguity, major power, capability, and IGOs) derive from 


15 
conceptualizations of the COW project and are measured by COW.  We lag all independent 
variables one year to make temporally plausible any inference of causation.18 
Our data set is the population of politically relevant dyads for the pre-cold war period 
(PCW), from 1885 to 1945, and the cold war and immediate post-cold war period (CW), from 
1946 to 1992, as described extensively and used by Russett and Oneal (2001).  For the first 
population, PCW, only the initial year of the two world wars, 1914 and 1939, is included in the 
dataset.  This restriction insures that the analysis is not unduly influenced by World Wars I and 
II, and by the absence of adequate trade data for the wartime and immediate postwar years.
Following the analysis of portfolio and instructional materials data, preservice teachers were interviewed during their final term (following student teaching) of the MAT program. These semi-structured interviews were conducted to validate responses to the NOS questionnaire and generate in-depth profiles of the participants’ views. The interviews were also used to verify and corroborate the previous analysis of the other data sources and to elucidate the factors that explain preservice teachers’ instructional emphasis on the NOS. A core set of questions guided the interviews: 


422 ABD-EL-KHALICK ET AL.
SCE (WILEJ) LEFT INTERACTIVE 
short standard long 
1. What do you think are the most important things to emphasize in your teaching? Why? 2. What in your opinion is the NOS? What makes science different from other disciplines of 
inquiry (religion, philosophy, etc.)? 3. (At this point interviewees were provided with their questionnaires, were asked to famil-

iarize themselves with their earlier responses and to comment on and clarify these responses.) What did you mean by your response to question number 1 (interviewee’s responses to all 7 questions were explored and clarified)?
4. Do you think that teaching the NOS is important? Why? (or why not?) 5. Did you teach the NOS? If yes, how? Why did you teach the NOS in that particular way?
(If not, why?) 6. Did you do enough? Can you elaborate? 7. Did your students learn the NOS? How do you know? Did you assess your students’ 
understanding of the NOS? How did you do that? 8. (The participants were then provided with evidence from the analysis of their lesson plans,
work samples, and videotapes and asked to comment on any discrepancies between what they said they did and what was in their plans and portfolios.) On reviewing your lesson plans, I observed that you did not (or did) do much with the NOS. Why?
9. I did not (or did) observe that you assessed understanding of the NOS? Why? (or Why did you assess understanding of the NOS in that particular way?) 
10. How will you deal with the NOS when you have your own class?
This has been well documented in the case of Spain and Greece, again using VAR 
methodology and quarterly terrorism data (Enders and Sandler 1996). In Spain, terrorism 
is estimated to have reduced annual FDI inflow by 13.5% on average for the period 1975-

1991. This translates into a decline in real FDI of almost 500 million dollars. In a similar 
period of time (1976-1991), Greece was plagued by two major terrorist organizations, the 
17 November and the Revolutionary Popular Struggle. Both are extreme left-wing 
movements. The reduction of FDI was estimated to be, on average, 11.9% annually. This 
translates into a loss amounting to almost 400 million dollars. As FDI is an important 
source of savings, investment and economic growth are negatively affected. Moreover,
the transfer of technological know-how into the country is reduced, again putting a 
damper on growth. Thus, the economic costs are substantial.8 
3. Savings and consumption. Apart from foreign direct investment, the investment rate is 
mainly constrained by the domestic savings rate. Consumption and, hence, savings rates 
may be affected by terrorist activity in different ways. On the one hand, political violence 
might increase perceived risks associated with savings, either because legal claims on 
assets are compromised or because individuals are prevented from spending the money 
their savings have earned. On the other hand, terrorism may induce individuals to place 
their money in safe havens rather than buy, for example, durable consumer goods. The 
two effects point in opposite directions; how consumption is affected by terrorism is,
therefore, ultimately an empirical question. However, the empirical evidence is also 
ambiguous. Fielding (2003a) uses the variation in political tensions and violence in Israel 
over time to analyze the impact of political instability on Israeli aggregate consumption 
and thus on aggregate savings. He hypothesizes that the perceived insecurity depends 
mainly on the number of deaths in Israel proper and/or the number of deaths in the West 
Bank and Gaza areas, as well as the rate of growth of the Jewish settlements in the West 
Bank and Gaza areas. To investigate the impact of political instability on Israeli savings,
Fielding (2003a) estimates a macro-econometric consumption function for Israel in the 
                                                   8 For three larger European nations, namely France, West Germany and Italy, Enders and Sandler (1996) find no impact of terrorism on FDI.


- 12 -

period 1989-1999 with quarterly data including the indicators of political instability 
mentioned. This permits the computation of how aggregate private sector consumption 
would change if there were to be a complete cessation of the conflict (measured by these 
indicators). If the number of fatalities in Israel proper decreased by its average level,
consumption would fall by over 7%. The respective number for a reduction of fatalities in 
the West Bank and Gaza areas is over 5%. In contrast, the effect of freezing settlement 
construction would be negligibly small. Given Israel’s poor savings performance, the 
effect would be huge. According to Fielding (2003a, p. 309), “the savings ratio in Israel 
would almost double as a result of a complete cessation of violence.” Eckstein and 
Tsiddon (2004), in contrast, using VAR methodology estimates with quarterly data for 
the Israeli economy from 1950-2003, find a negative effect of terrorism on consumption.

SCE (WILEJ) RIGHT INTERACTIVE 
short standard long 
q 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. CCC 0036-8326/98/040417-20 
The Nature of Science and Instructional Practice: Making the Unnatural Natural 
FOUAD ABD-EL-KHALICK, RANDY L. BELL, NORMAN G. LEDERMAN Department of Science & Mathematics Education, Oregon State University, Weniger Hall 237, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA 
Received 29 April 1997; revised 17 September 1997; accepted 5 December 1997 
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to delineate the factors that mediate the translation of preservice teachers’ conceptions of the nature of science (NOS) into instructional planning and classroom practice. Fourteen preservice secondary science teachers participated in the study. Prior to their student teaching, participants responded to an open-ended questionnaire designed to assess their conceptions of the NOS. Analysis of the questionnaires was postponed until after the completion of student teaching to avoid biasing the collection and/or analysis of other data sources. Throughout student teaching, participants’ daily lesson plans, classroom videotapes, and portfolios, and supervisors’ weekly clinical observation notes were collated. These data were searched for explicit references to the NOS. Following student teaching, participants were individually interviewed to validate their responses to the open-ended questionnaire and to identify the factors or constraints that mediate the translation of their conceptions of the NOS into their classroom teaching. Participants were found to possess adequate understandings of several important aspects of the NOS including the empirical and tentative nature of science, the distinction between observation and inference, and the role of subjectivity and creativity in science. Many claimed to have taught the NOS through science-based activities. However, data analyses revealed that explicit references to the NOS were rare in their planning and instruction. Participants articulated several factors for this lack of attention to the NOS. These included viewing the NOS as less significant than other instructional outcomes, preoccupation with classroom management and routine chores, discomfort with their own understandings of the NOS, the lack of resources and experience for teaching the NOS, cooperating teachers’ imposed restraints, and the lack of planning time. In addition to these volunteered constraints, the data revealed others related to an intricate interaction between participants’ perspectives on the NOS, pedagogy, and instructional outcomes. q 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Sci Ed 82:417–436, 1998.
INTRODUCTION Science educators and major science education organizations are increasingly advocating the 
preparation of scientifically literate students (e.g., American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS], 1990, 1993; National Research Council [NRC], 1996). Scientific literacy generally refers to one’s understanding of the concepts, principles, theories, and processes of science,
Correspondence to: F. Abd-El-Khalick; e-mail: abdelkhf@ucs.orst.edu 


418 ABD-EL-KHALICK ET AL.
SCE (WILEJ) LEFT INTERACTIVE 
short standard long 
and one’s awareness of the complex relationships between science, technology, and society. A scientifically literate person should also develop a functional understanding of the nature of science (NOS) (Klopfer, 1969; National Science Teachers Association [NSTA], 1982). Indeed, the explicit goal of helping students develop adequate conceptions of the NOS can be traced back to the turn of the century (Central Association of Science and Mathematics Teachers, 1907). However, research has shown that this goal has not been realized (Lederman, 1992). Recent research efforts have highlighted the central role of teachers by focusing on their conceptions and classroom practice. Such is the focus of this investigation. Before proceeding, we feel that it is critically important to elaborate on our definition of the NOS and the several assumptions that have guided previous research.
the respondent, did not “like them,” “feel as if you could cooperate with this  
person” or “would like to repeat this interaction”? Such measures fail to satisfy  
content and construct validity requirements in measuring social presence.
Summary: Is there a common root to current limitations in social presence theory  
and measurement?


    
31  
We have reviewed some of the conceptualizations and measures of social  
presence and discussed some possible limitations.  We have suggested that the  
following problems affect some or all the current theories:  
· A definitions that tend towards (a) vague, overly broad, or circular definitions of  
social presence, and (b) that tend to blur the logical distinction between the  
psychological state of social presence and the psychological or behavioral effects  
of social presence.
· Confusion as to whether social presence should be a measured as a property of  
a medium or a phenomenal state of users.
· Limitations in the wide application of measures because of (a) assumptions  
about the technology used in the social interaction, (b) assumptions about the  
range of social interactions that give rise to social presence.
Many of the limitations can be traced to problems in specifying the range and  
scope of the phenomena:  
· Defining the limited scope of psychological phenomena that constitute social  
presence.
Firstly, the scale of physical travel is immense, certainly by comparison with any other period of history. In 2004 there were a record of 760 million legal international tourist arrivals,3 compared with 25 million in 1950 and a  predicted 1.6 billion in 2020.4 ‘Travel and tourism’ is the largest industry  in the world, accounting for 11.7 per cent of world GDP, 8 per cent of world exports and 8 per cent of employment. Side-by-side with global travellers are 31 million refugees and 100 million international migrants worldwide (Papastergiadis 1999: 10, 41, 54). The most rapidly growing form of smuggling is that of human beings moved across borders, with an associated growth in the international ‘slave’ trade. Such patterns of physical travel seem to be affecting almost everywhere. The World Tourism Organization publishes tourism statistics for some 220 countries5, with almost nowhere not being either or both a significant sender and receiver of visitors, although the flows are very uneven.
Whereas disposable incomes in Western Europe and the USA have increased substantially within the last decades, airfares and the cost of car travel, measured in real terms, have decreased (Frandberg and Vilhemson 2003: 1755;Tarry 2003: 82). People in Britain are physically travelling five times further per year than in the 1950s, and this figure is expected to double again by 2025 (Adams 1999: 12; Vigar 2002). Most journeys taken now were not undertaken at all when cycles and buses were the main forms of travel.6 From the 1930s to the 1990s commuting distance more than doubled, yet commuting time increased by less than five minutes (Pooley and Turnbull 2000a, 2000b). UK citizens currently make around 1000 journeys a year, a figure that seem fairly constant (Doyle and Nathan 2001). What is clearly the case is that people are travelling further and faster but neither more often nor spending much more time actually ‘on the road’. The average daily time spent travelling has remained at around one hour per person for the past three decades, as has the average trip time around 22 minutes (Department for Transport 2004; Lyons and Urry 2005; Schafer and Victor 2000: 271). Fifty-eight per  cent of the population in UK undertake long distance journeys, which is slighter higher than the average in the EU (Dateline Dateline Consortium 2003: 16).
Secondly, the billion or so TVs de-sever local, national and global worlds through the forms of ‘imaginative travel’ that they afford. Television has transformed all our ‘little worlds’ without the need to move corporeally outside one’s home (Szerszynski and Toogood 2000; Urry 2000: ch. 3). Dick Hebdige suggests that many people are ‘world travellers’ through the TV. ‘It is part of 
116 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


being “taken for a ride” in and through late-twentieth century consumer culture. In the 1990s everybody is more or less cosmopolitan’ (Hebdige 1990: 20). This experience is rooted in what Raymond Williams (1974) calls ‘televisual flow’ – viewers are thrown into the extraordinary, flowing visual world that lies beyond the domestic regime, an instantaneous mirror (selectively) reflecting the rest of the world then mirrored into people’s homes. Sensations of other places, especially facilitated through channel-hopping and programmes that simulate channel-hopping, create an awareness of extraordinary, fluid interdependence. It is hard not to think that television and travel, the mobile and the modem, seem to be producing a global village, blurring what is present and what is absent, what is public and what is private, what is front-stage and what is back-stage, what is near and what is far (Meyrowitz 1985).
Thirdly, there have always also been forms of ‘virtual travel’, of communication between people who are geographically distant that do not involve personal travel. Today these include letters, postcards, birthday and Christmas cards, telegrams, telephones, faxes, text messages, emails, emails, instant messages and videoconferences. The overall volume of international telephone calls increased at least tenfold between 1982 and 2001 (Vertovec 2004: 223). In 2003, two-thirds of the UK adult population were Internet users. There are now more mobile phones than landlines and, in May 2003, according to National Statistics7, 75 per cent of all adults in the UK owned or used a mobile phone, and in 2001 the total number of mobile phones worldwide for the first time surpassed the number of TV sets (Katz and Aakhus 2002). Each month more than 2 billion text messages are sent in the UK. The recent period has thus seen a tremendous increase in virtual travel, due to the emergence of new writing cultures based on emails, weblogs and text messages. The triumph of these new writing cultures seem intricately connected to their fast, frictionless and connective travel through social and geographical space, designed for people on the move.
ERIC NEUMAYER 395 


richer than their developing country counterparts. Where included, the political regime and violent political conflict do not matter, but human rights violations do. To our knowledge, there does not exist any quantitative study of the determi-

nants of asylum migration to developed country destinations other than Germany and Switzerland. Our study aspires to fill this gap. In covering all Western European destination countries, we cover flows of asylum migration more comprehensively, also accounting for the fact that asylum seekers often substitute one destination country for another in reaction to deterrence measures. In addition, we test a more comprehensive range of potential determinants of asylum migration. In particular, we want to find out whether the political regime and the incidence of violent political conflict actually are irrelevant for explaining flows of asylum seeking.
Research Methodology 
The Dependent Variable 
The dependent variable (ASYLUM) is the annual number of asylum seekers in Western European countries by country of origin over the period 1982–1999, as published by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR, 2001).10 The data go back to 1980, but we lose the first 2 years since some of our independent variables are lagged. Western Europe refers to the 15 European Union (EU) member countries plus Norway and Switzerland. Countries of origin are in principle all developing countries, that is, all countries other than Western Europe, Northern America, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, which are naturally not countries of origin themselves. However, missing data on some of the explanatory variables lead to a sample of 127 developing countries, which together account for around 85 percent of all asylum seekers in Western Europe. The applications generally refer to the number of applicants or persons, rather 
than the number of applications or families, and exclude repeat or appeal applications. We focus on asylum application in Western European countries mainly for reasons of better data availability. The UNHCR does not provide information on asylum applications by country of origin in the United States before 1987; in Canada before 1989; and in Australia, New Zealand, and Japan before 1996. Data from European countries other than the Western European ones are similarly sparse. Given that Western Europe received some 12 million asylum applications amounting to about 72 percent of all applications lodged in developed countries over the period 1980–1999 (see Table 1 above), our dependent variable captures the main flows of asylum seeking. Only those persons who have officially filed a formal request for asylum are included. Other refugees who, for whatever reason, are either unwilling or unable to file an asylum request, and illegal immigrants are not included.11 Practically no statistical information exists for these other refugees and illegal immigrants.
The Independent Variables 
We need to ensure that our empirical model captures the complexity of likely causes of asylum migration. Faced with the paucity of data on unemployment rates and real wages, we resort to taking the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in purchasing power parity and constant U.S.$ of 1997 (GDP per capita) as our variable representing the economic incentive for migration. The data are taken from World Bank (2001) as the primary source and from WHO (2000) as the supplementary 
10 Figures below five are not available and were coded as zero in our sample. 11 For example, before 1991, it was not possible for persons from non-European countries to apply for asylum in 
Italy.
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe396 


source. In accordance with our theoretical considerations, we pre-tested for a nonlinear effect of economic development on migration flows. However, we found no evidence for such an effect and therefore excluded the squared term from the main estimations reported below. We also include the average annual growth rate over the last 3 years (GROWTH) as another measure of economic hardship since average living standards typically deteriorate in times of economic crisis, independent of the income level. In addition, we included an index of economic discrimination against ethnic minorities (ECONDISCRIMINATION) from the Minorities at Risk data set, which codes the severity of discrimination on a 0–4 scale (CIDCM, 2002). This index was multiplied by the population share of the minority discriminated against. In the case of several minorities, the sum of all population-weighted discrimination indices was taken. To capture the effect that people in their working age are more likely to migrate, we include the share of 15-to 64-year-olds among the total population in the country of origin (%POP15–64) (World Bank, 2001). To measure political oppression, we constructed an autocracy variable as the 
unweighted sum of the political rights and civil liberties index (AUTOCRACY) published by Freedom House (2002). In this source, political rights refer to, for example, the freedom to organize in political parties or groupings, the existence of party competition, and an effective opposition, as well as the existence and fairness of elections including the possibility of taking power via those elections. Civil liberties refer to, for example, the freedom of the media, the right to open and free discussion, the freedom of assembly, the freedom of religious expression, the protection from political terror, and the prevalence of the rule of law. The two indices are based on surveys among experts assessing the extent to which a country effectively respects political rights and civil liberties, both measured on a 1 (best) to 7 (worst) scale. In accordance with our theoretical considerations, we pre-tested for a nonlinear effect of autocracy on asylum migration. There is some weak evidence for such an effect in the results reported below. Using Freedom House data over a period of time is not unproblematic since the 
scale, with which countries are judged, changes slightly over time and it is not designed as a series. The Polity data for measuring democracy do not suffer from this problem, but since they are available for fewer countries than Freedom House data, they are used here only in sensitivity analysis (POLITY) (Gurr and Jaggers, 2000). As a measure of human rights violations (RIGHTSVIOLATION), we use the two 
Purdue Political Terror Scales (PTS) in accordance with many studies of refugee flows in the developing world (Davenport et al. 2003; Moore and Shellman, 2003). One of the two PTS is based upon a codification of country information from Amnesty International’s annual human rights reports to a scale from 1 (best) to 5 (worst). Analogously, the other scale is based upon information from the U.S. Department of State’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. The simple average of the two scales was used for the present study. If one index was unavailable for a particular year, the other one available was substituted for the aggregate index (data from Gibney, 2002). Following Moore and Shellman’s (2003) study, in order to measure threats to 
personal security from violent dissident political activity, we take the sum of guerrilla and riot events from Arthur Banks’ Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive (DISSIDENTVIOLENCE). The major disadvantage of the Banks’ violent events count data is that they do not measure the intensity of violence other than by the number of violent events occurring. However, we have no other measure available. Another disadvantage is that the Archive is commercially marketed and not freely accessible. Its data were collected as part of the U.S. State Failure Task Force Project and have been published by King and Zeng (2001), but only up to 1995. We therefore include this variable only in additional model estimations to avoid the loss of 4 years of observations.
· 3D social virtual environments: Fully mediated, social interaction in computer  
graphic bodies including a full range of social interaction and contacts (Fischer,
1988; Munro, Höök et al., 1999; Singhal and Zyda, 1999; Schroeder, 2001).
Evaluation of these systems typically must answer a version of the question:  
How well do these systems work? Although the answer to this question might take  
a technical form, the answer is largely social psychological in nature. It might take  
the form of the following questions: How well did one person feel connected to  
another through an interface? What was the appropriate level of interaction for the  
task?  Did the user feel socially and psychologically connected to an intelligent  
“other” when interacting with the virtual human agent? In essence, the assessment  


    
7  
of satisfaction with entertainment systems and with productive performance in  
teleconferencing and collaborative virtual environments is based largely on the  
quality of the social presence they afford.
Typically claims made for the development of social presence technologies  
tend to emphasize some “good,” that is a positive social or communication  
outcome. But a moment’s reflection suggests that we might not want to equate  
social presence with all things good and kind. For example, increased social  
presence can also be a hindrance and can make people vulnerable to manipulation,
deception, mindless processing, and so forth.  The former executive director of Bell  
Labs, Bob Lucky, imagined the need for a “social presence dial” that could dial social  
presence up or down - up for a loved one or down for a salesperson (Moyers,
1990). This underlines the often-repeated caution that “more is not always good.”  
3. Social presence research may be means of exploring the larger issues in  
theories of mind, social cognition, and interpersonal communication.
How broad should a theory of social presence be? What should be the scope  
of the social interactions it seeks to explain and measure? There may be a danger  
for theories of social presence to drift too far towards overly broad theories of all  
social interaction instead of being theories of mediated social interaction. While we  
believe a theory of social presence should yield some insight into fundamental  
epistemological issues in the “knowledge of other minds” (Gordon, 1986; Dennett,
1987; Carruthers and Smith, 1996; Dennett, 1996; Premack and Premack, 1996)  
or social psychological issues in person perception, all human interaction is not the  
scope of phenomena to be explained. The scope of social presence theory is the  
explanation of technologically mediated human interaction specifically. This focus is  
how technology provides filters that add or subtract cues found in unmediated  
social interaction.
A central concern of social presence theory has to be whether technologically  
mediated social interaction is or is not different from unmediated interaction. If  
mediated interaction is different than unmediated interaction, in what way is it  
different and what is it about technology that causes this difference? Although  
mediated and unmediated social interaction may draw upon the same cognitive  
mechanisms, there is an assumption in all presence research that “technology has  
an effect.” To support human-computer interaction studies and mediated  
communication studies, the theory of mediated social presence is likely to be a  
theory of how differences in technological connection, representations, and  


    
36  
mediated access affect, distort, or enhance the perception (mental model) of  
others’ intentional, cognitive, and affective states and behavior resulting from those  
perceptions. Because social interaction is increasingly mediated social interaction, a  
theory of mediated social presence is likely to be able to contribute to philosophical  
and psychological theories of other minds and theories of interpersonal  
communication.
Operationalizing social presence  
Researchers use social presence theory for both explanatory and diagnostic  
(control) aspects of science. Typically, researchers in human-computer interaction  
and telecommunication may use presence theories and measures to directly  
compare different media. Researchers may come to focus on social presence  
because they want to explore how the communication or task performance of  
users of different interfaces affects how they perceive and behave in their  
communication with collaborator(s) using the different systems. Thus, theories of  
social presence tend to be primarily focused on developing metrics that allow these  
comparisons of technological differences, and less focused on individual differences  
among users, task differences, etc. To achieve direct comparisons of the  
communication effectiveness of increasingly slight differences in media technology,
a theory of social presence would need to be tied to very precise measures of user  
responses to mediated others. Therefore, the theory may need to define the  
phenomenon of social presence in a way that is suitable to precise measurement.
Unfortunately, some theories of co-presence/social presence do not lend  
themselves easily to measurement because the concepts are at too vaguely or  
descriptively to support measurement (e.g., Goffman, 1959), or social presence is  


    
37  
collapsed to a single dimension (e.g., Short, Williams & Christie), or social presence  
may be defined narrowly to facilitate easier measurement (e.g., Bailenson, 2001).

Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, Vol. 34, No. 1, February 2006, pp. 71–85 ( C© 2006) DOI: 10.1007/s10802-005-9001-z 
The Development of Physical Aggression from Toddlerhood to Pre-Adolescence: A Nation Wide Longitudinal Study of Canadian Children 
Sylvana M. Coˆte´,1,6 Tracy Vaillancourt,2 John C. LeBlanc,3 Daniel S. Nagin,4 and Richard E. Tremblay5 
Received April 22, 2004; revision received January 18, 2005; accepted March 21, 2005 Published online: 25 March 2006 
The objectives of the study were to model the developmental trajectories of physical aggression (PA) from toddlerhood to pre-adolescence and to identify risk factors that distinguish typical (normative) from atypical developmental patterns. Ten cohorts of approximately 1,000 children (n = 10,658) drawn form a nationally representative (Canadian) sample were followed over 6 years. Using a group-based trajectory approach, we identified three groups of children with distinct developmental trajectories between 2 and 11 years of age. One third of the children (31.1%) followed a low desisting trajectory, reflected in infrequent use of PA in toddlerhood and virtually no PA by pre-adolescence. The majority of children (52.2%) followed a moderate desisting trajectory, reflected in occasional use of PA in toddlerhood and infrequent use by pre-adolescence. One sixth of the children (16.6%) followed a high stable trajectory of PA. Multivariate logistic regression indicated that children in the high PA trajectory group were more likely to be boys (OR: 1.67; CI: 1.5–1.87), from low income families (OR: 1.4; CI; 1.27–1.67), from families where the mother had not completed high school (OR: 1.20; CI: 1.05–1.38) and who reported using hostile/ineffective parenting strategies (OR: 1.16; CI: 1.14–1.18). In sum, the results indicate that the typical developmental pattern of PA was one of occasional and declining use over time. However, about one sixth of children, mostly boys from disadvantaged families, exhibited an atypical developmental pattern reflected in more frequent and stable use of PA. The results suggest that most children learned relatively well to inhibit PA by the end of childhood and that a minority failed to do so. Family risks traditionally found to be associated with antisocial behaviors during adolescence appear to interfere with the socialization of PA during early and middle childhood.
KEY WORDS: developmental trajectories; physical aggression; toddlerhood; middle childhood; family risk factors.
1 School of Psychoe´ducation, University of Montre´al, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
2 Department of Psychology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
3 Department of Pediatrics and Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
4 H. J. Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Combining the semiotic and extra-semiotic in this way facilitates two lines of  investigation of particular relevance to economic, political, and cultural geography.


 3  
First, given the infinity of meaningful communications and (mis)understandings  enabled by semiosis, how do extra-semiotic as well as semiotic factors affect the  variation, selection, and retention of particular instances of semiosis and their  associated practices in ordering, reproducing and transforming capitalist social  formations and their various spatio-temporal features? Second, given the  contradictions, dilemmas, indeterminacy, and overall improbability of capitalist  reproduction, especially during its recurrent crises, what role does semiosis play in  construing, constructing, and temporarily stabilizing capitalist social formations at  least within specific spatio-temporal fixes and their zones of relative stability even as  it displaces and defers conflicts, contradictions, and crisis-tendencies elsewhere  and/or into the future?2 In regard to both questions, we argue, as noted above, that  the relative weight of semiotic and extra-semiotic mechanisms changes over the  analytically distinct, but frequently empirically overlapping, steps of variation,  selection, and retention. After elaborating the general case for CPE, we illustrate it  from the emergence, selection, and attempted implementation of two successive  economic imaginaries that have informed economic policies in Belgium: the Belgian  and Flemish ‘anchoring’ strategies. We conclude with a set of guidelines for the  further development of cultural political economy.
Cultural Political Economy    
Arguments in favour of ‘cultural political economy’ seem to have emerged in several  contexts during the 1990s as part of and/or in response to the cultural turn. The  present version was developed by scholars at Lancaster University3 drawing on a far  wider range of sources. But it was prefigured in some major versions of critical  political economy and in some ‘old institutionalisms’ and it has significant parallels in  a range of contemporary disciplinary and trans-disciplinary endeavours.4 Among  recent geographical studies, for example, we can note the contrasting approaches of  Barnett (2004), Crang (1997), Hudson (2004), Mitchell (2000), Sayer (2001), and  Thrift (2004). Our CPE approach has three defining features. First, like other currents  in evolutionary and institutional political economy and unlike the more usual generic  studies of semiosis, CPE opposes transhistorical analyses, insisting that both history  and institutions matter. This is where the strategic-relational dialectic of path-dependency and path-shaping and its associated emphasis on the evolutionary  


 4  
mechanisms of variation, selection, and retention (Campbell 1969) have a key role in  shaping the dynamics of semiosis. Second, unlike many currents in evolutionary and  institutional political economy but like other variants of cultural materialism, CPE  takes the cultural turn seriously, highlighting the complex relations between  meanings and practices. For the production of intersubjective meaning is crucial to  the description, understanding, and explanation of economic and political conduct  just as it is for other types of behaviour and their emergent properties. And, third,  building on these two features, CPE focuses on the co-evolution of semiotic and  extra-semiotic processes and their conjoint impact on the constitution and dynamic of  capitalist formations. This general approach can be re-stated in terms of four broad  claims about the role of semiosis in the critique of political economy.
Ontologically, semiosis has a key role in the overall constitution of specific social  objects and social subjects and, a fortiori, in their co-constitution and co-evolution in  wider ensembles of social relations. Thus CPE rejects two related tendencies in  orthodox political economy: (a) the tendency to naturalize or reify its theoretical  objects (such as land, machines, the division of labour, production, money,  commodities, the information economy); and (b) the tendency to offer thin accounts,  at most, of how subjects and subjectivities are formed and how different modes of  calculation emerge, come to be institutionalized, and get modified. For CPE,  technical and economic objects are always socially constructed, historically specific,  more or less socially embedded in – or disembedded from – broader networks of  social relations and institutional ensembles, more or less embodied and ‘embrained’  in individual actors, and require continuing social 'repair' work for their reproduction.  The same points hold for the objects of orthodox political science and (neo-)realist  international relations theory. The former tends to treat the state as a set of  governmental institutions used by state managers and other political forces to pursue  interests that are objectively grounded in their respective social positions. Realist and  neo-realist international relations theory also naturalizes interests in explaining the  necessary logic of state action. In contrast, the Lancaster CPE approach follows  Marx, Gramsci, and Poulantzas (among others) in studying the state in its inclusive  sense (‘political society + civil society’) as a social relation. This approach regards  state power as the discursively- and institutionally-mediated condensation of a  changing balance of forces. It examines struggles to shape the identities,
Insert Figure 1 about here  
Consistent with some previous research, first-year students’ diversity density was  
negatively related to satisfaction and perceived interpersonal support (Hu & Kuh, 2003;  
Rothman, Lipset, & Nevitte, 2003). However, the diversity press model does not show these  
negative effects, indicating that the negative impact of diversity density on satisfaction and  
interpersonal supported is ameliorated when institutions offer courses that emphasize diverse  
perspectives and create a climate that promotes interactions between people from different  
backgrounds. This finding is consistent with Hurtado et al. (1999) and Chang (1999) who argue  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 19  
that structural diversity in and of itself does not necessarily result in an environment supportive  
of diversity. In order for institutions to optimize the benefits of structural diversity they need to  
display a commitment to diversity and provide opportunities for diverse interactions (Chang,
1999, p. 392). Our findings support these claims and suggest that one way to do this is to present  
diverse perspectives in the classroom. Additionally, institutions need to find other ways to  
communicate the value of diversity and support the academic and social needs of students from  
different backgrounds. In the context of liberal arts colleges, most of which tend to be relatively  
small, apparently the magnitude of the number of students from different backgrounds does not  
matter as much to deriving the benefits of diversity experiences as does the quality of  
interactions across differences that the campus environment encourages and nurtures.
Implications  
 Taken together, the findings from this study indicate that an institution does not have to  
be highly structurally diverse to foster meaningful diversity experiences.  Few of the Liberal Arts  
Colleges in this study were as or more structurally diverse than, for example, larger research-

intensive universities.  Yet, Liberal Arts Colleges appeared to have created environments that  
took advantage of the limited diversity on campus. Institutions that use the absence of structural  
diversity as an explanation for why they are unable to enhance student learning through  
diversity-related activities could look to Liberal Arts Colleges for ideas as to how they are able to  
promote diversity experiences.
    
Liberal Arts Colleges are not the only type of institutions that have effectively infused  
diversity experiences into the undergraduate program.  In fact, much can be learned from large  
universities about their innovative approaches that facilitate cross-group interactions, such as the  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 20  
University of Michigan, University of Maryland, Indiana University, and Arizona State  
University.  These institutions have implemented intergroup dialogues that bring together diverse  
groups of students with the purpose of discussing issues related to their diversity. So far, the  
research on the impact of these experiences is promising, suggesting that these dialogues are an  
effective way for students to learn to become citizens in an increasingly diverse society (Schoem  
& Hurtado, 2001).
The field would benefit from additional efforts to codify programs, policies, and practices  
both at liberal arts colleges which as a group seem to be relatively effective at promoting  
beneficial experiences with diversity as well as other types of institutions that perform better than  
predicted in this area (Garcia et al., 2002).  In addition, a diversity audit tool similar to the one  
described by Green (1989) that reliably assesses the factors and conditions that encourage  
students to experience diversity could be profitably used by institutions and to external groups  
such as accreditation organizations.
Conclusion  
This study adds to our understanding of institutional characteristics that are related to  
students’ experiences with diversity. As colleges and universities prepare students to live and  
work in an increasingly diverse democracy, many liberal arts colleges appear to have created  
learning environments distinguished by an accentuated diversity press.  Opportunities to interact  
across racial, religious, and socio-economic lines seem to be the critical factor in terms of  
creating an environment that supports experiences with diversity and for cultivating the skills  
and dispositions that are considered essential to be effective in an increasingly multicultural  
society. Although structural diversity is not a sufficient condition for realizing the benefits that  
accrue from experiencing diversity, recruiting students from a broad range of backgrounds,
Finally, given that the data used in this study are cross-sectional, we are unable to control  
for self selection. Perhaps students who matriculate to liberal arts colleges are more predisposed  
to seek out people from different backgrounds or believe that these colleges provide them with  
opportunities for these types of interactions.  While the latter is not likely, given the limited  
structural diversity of many liberal arts colleges, the former is possible and warrants a cautionary  
note.
Discussion  
The findings from this study suggest that liberal arts colleges create distinctive learning  
environments for students in terms of diversity experiences. The advantage is consistent across  
the outcomes measures used in this study and often supported by substantial effect sizes even  
after controlling for student and other institutional features. Students at liberal arts colleges are  
significantly more likely than their counterparts at other types of institutions to engage in  
diversity-related activities and to report greater gains in understanding people from diverse  
backgrounds.
In terms of the overall effects of diversity experiences across different types of colleges  
and universities, the results generally corroborate the research showing positive relationships  
between diversity and desirable outcomes of college. That is, students who engaged in diversity-

related activities more frequently reported higher levels of academic challenge, greater  
opportunities for active and collaborative learning, and a more supportive campus environment.


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 18  
They were also more satisfied with their college experience and reported greater gains since  
starting college in a variety of areas.
Liberal arts colleges generally perform well on measures of student engagement  
compared to other types of colleges and universities (Astin, 1993, 1999; Hu & Kuh, 2003; Kuh,
2003; Kuh & Hu, 2001; National Survey of Student Engagement, 2000, 2001, 2002). But the  
pattern of results favoring liberal arts colleges in terms of diversity experiences is surprising if  
for no other reason that many of these institutions are not naturally imbued with some forms of  
diversity. For example, many liberal arts colleges are located for historical reasons in rural  
settings (Rudolph, 1990), which are not racially or socioeconomically diverse or viewed as  
desirable collegiate environments by many students from historically underrepresented groups  
(e.g, students of color, first-generation college students). As a result, liberal arts colleges should  
not be expected to score well on the diversity density index.  Figure 1 displays the relatively low  
structural diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges. Although we see differences between and within  
institution types, only Baccalaureate General Institutions had a lower median diversity density  
index than Liberal Arts Colleges.
Why develop a theory and measurement of social presence? Where might it  
be useful? A useable theory and measure of social presence might provide a key  
contribution to three problem areas in networked computing.
1. Using social presence theory to explore the design goals, social motivations of  
users, properties, and effects of telecommunication systems.
The Internet is a social place. Because of growth in our telecommunication  
infrastructure (Internet.com, 2001), many relationships and more and more  
interactions with others are mediated by the telecommunication system.
Increasing network bandwidth, higher mobility, and more immersive designs  
promise to offer a better sense of access to real and virtual places, i.e., the sense  
of telepresence. But the use of this bandwidth will rarely be focused on visiting  
places, virtual ghost towns devoid of other interactants. More fundamentally, most  
telecommunication bandwidth is used to gain satisfying and productive access to  
others, the thoughts, emotions, and presence of real and virtual humans (e.g. the  
internet, Pew, 2002; the telephone, Fischer, 1988). Because we are social beings,
a common purpose of physical presence is to increase the sense of social presence  
either as an end in itself or accomplish a task involving many inputs.
Research in organizational communication indicates that media may be  
selected to better accommodate activities affected by social presence (Rice and  
Case, 1983; Steinfield, 1986; Palmer, 1995). Users may sometimes use media to  
modulate social presence for a wide range of activities including getting to know  


    
5  
someone, exchanging information or goods, problem solving and making decisions,
More important, the findings strongly suggest that policies intended to reduce crime by eradicating disorder solely through tough law enforcement tactics are misdirected. (For a list of recent NIJ publications on policing disorder and related topics, see “Crime, Disorder, and Public Safety: Selected NIJ Publications.”) Eradicating disorder may reduce crime indirectly by stabilizing neighborhoods. This is implied in the finding that there is no direct link between disorder and most preda-

tory crimes. Neighborhoods with high levels of disorder did not have higher crime rates than neighborhoods with low levels of disorder once collective efficacy and neighborhood characteristics were taken into account. Visible street-level disorder does not necessarily translate into high rates of violence; hence, public disorder may not be so “criminogenic” after all in certain neighborhood and social contexts. The active ingredients of crime seem to be structural disadvantages and low levels of collective efficacy more than disorder.
Tackling public disorder as a means of reducing crime leaves the common origins of both, but especially the latter, untouched. Perhaps more effective would be an approach that focuses on how residents’ efforts to stem disorder may reap unanticipated benefits in greater collective efficacy, which in turn would lower crime in the long run. Informally mobilizing a neighborhood cleanup, for example, would reduce physical disorder while building  


collective efficacy by creating and strengthening social ties and increasing awareness of the residents’ commitment to their neighborhood. Such a mobilization might also demonstrate to participants and observers alike that neighborhood residents could be relied on to maintain public order. By contrast, a police-led crackdown on disorder would probably produce a very different response by residents.
Notes 
1. The thesis was first elaborated by James Q. Wilson and George Kelling in “The Police and Neighborhood Safety: Broken Windows,” Atlantic Monthly 249 (3) (March 1982): 29–36, 38.
2. Wilson, William Julius, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987; Land, Kenneth, Patricia McCall, and Lawrence Cohen, “Structural Covariates of Homicide Rates: Are There Any Invariances across Time and Space?” American Journal of Sociology 95 (1990): 922–963; and Hagan, John, and Ruth Peterson, eds., Crime and Inequality, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995.
3. Kasarda, John, and Morris Janowitz, “Community Attachment in Mass Society,” American Sociological Review 39 (1974): 328–339.
4. Sampson, Robert J., Stephen Raudenbush, and Felton J. Earls, “Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy,” Science 277 (1997): 918–924. This article was summarized as Neighborhood Collective Efficacy—Does It Help Reduce Violence?
The former Soviet Union is, with sub-Saharan Africa, one of only two major regions where life expectancy is currently declining (McMichael et al. 2004). The Soviet health system, despite its many weaknesses, did achieve basic universal coverage. While some of the Soviet Union’s successor countries, such as the three Baltic republics (not included in this study) are now experiencing sustained economic growth and falling mortality, elsewhere the situation has deteriorated considerably and the prospects for the future are poor, with the situation especially adverse in the Caucasus republics (Armenia [Hovhannisyan et al. 2001] and Georgia [Gamkredlidze et al. 2003]). Yet even where the system still seems to be functioning, as in Belarus, there are no grounds for complacency. While recognizing the need for caution in interpreting economic statistics in this region, Belarus’s gross national product per capita has fallen by almost two-thirds in a decade; it seems unlikely that its social protection systems can be sustained in the medium term. In Russia, where there has been a relatively successful (at least compared with other post-Soviet republics) transition to health insurance, some vulnerable groups remain without coverage (Balabanova, Falkingham, and McKee 2003). Variations in access to health care received little attention during the Soviet period (Tkatchenko, McKee, and Tsouros 2000) and, posttransition, there has still been relatively little research on how different groups have fared in the face of 
Health Service Utilization in the Former Soviet Union 1947 


the changes to health systems in this region, with the notable exception of Russia (Field and Twigg 2000). Yet many of these countries face similar problems and there is room for shared learning. This study seeks to facilitate this process.
REFERENCES 
Badurashvili, I.,M.McKee, G. Tsuladze, F.Mesle´, J. Vallin, andV. Shkolnikov. 2001. ‘‘Where There Are No Data: What Has Happened to Life Expectancy in Georgia since 1990?’’ Public Health 115: 394–400.
Balabanova, D., J. Falkingham, and M. McKee. 2003. ‘‘Winners and Losers: The Expansion of Insurance Coverage in Russia in the 1990s.’’ American Journal of Public Health 93: 2124–30.
Balabanova, D., and M. McKee. 2002. ‘‘Understanding Informal Payments for Health Care: The Example of Bulgaria.’’ Health Policy 62: 243–73.
Brown, J. V., and N. L. Rusinova. 1997. ‘‘Russian Medical Care in the 1990s: A User’s Perspective.’’ Social Science Medicine 45: 1265–76.
Chekhov, A. P. 1987. The Island: A Journey to Sakhalin. London: Pimlico. Davis, C. 1979. The Economics of the Soviet Health System. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press. Falkingham, J. 2004. ‘‘Poverty, Out-of-Pocket Payments and Access to Health Care: 
Evidence from Tajikistan.’’ Social Science Medicine 58: 247–58. Falkingham, J., and S. Kanji. 2000. ‘‘Measuring Poverty in Russia: A Critical Review.’’ 
DFID working paper (available through enquiry@dfid.gov.uk). Field, M. G. 1957. Doctor and Patient in Soviet Russia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-

versity Press. ——————. 1999. ‘‘Reflections on A Painful Transition: From Socialized to Insurance 
Medicine in Russia.’’ Croatian Medical Journal 40: 202–9. ——————. 2002. ‘‘The Soviet Legacy: The Past as Prologue.’’ InHealth Care in Central Asia,
Relatively successful economic imaginaries have their own, performative, constitutive  force in the material world.6 For their operation presupposes a substratum of  substantive economic relations and instrumentalities as their elements; in addition,  where an imaginary is successfully operationalized and institutionalized, it transforms  and naturalizes these elements and instrumentalities into moments of a specific  economy with specific emergent properties. For economic imaginaries identify,  privilege, and seek to stabilize some economic activities from the sum of economic  relations and turn them into objects of observation, calculation, and governance.  Technologies of economic governance, operating sometimes more semiotically,  sometimes more materially,7 constitute their own objects of governance rather than  governing already pre-constituted objects (Jessop 1990, 1997).


 9  
Taking for granted the general principles of critical semiotic analysis (Fairclough  2003) to focus on broader evolutionary and institutional issues in political economy,  we note that there is constant variation, witting or unwitting, in apparently routine  social practices. This poses questions about the regularization of practices in normal  conditions and about possible sources of radical transformation, especially in periods  of crisis. The latter typically lead to profound cognitive and strategic disorientation of  social forces and a corresponding proliferation in discursive interpretations and  proposed material solutions. Nonetheless the same basic mechanisms serve to  select and consolidate radically new practices and to stabilize routine practices.  Simplifying the analysis of evolutionary mechanisms given in Fairclough et al. (2004)  and extending it to include material as well as semiotic factors, a first cut at  specifying these mechanisms suggests the following:  
 a) Continuing variation in discourses and practices, whether due to their  incomplete mastery, their skilful adaptation in specific circumstances, new  challenges or crises, or other semiotic or material causes.   b) Selection of particular discourses (the privileging of just some available,  including emergent, discourses) for interpreting events, legitimizing actions, and  (perhaps self-reflexively) representing social phenomena. Semiotic factors  operate here by influencing the resonance of discourses in personal,  organizational and institutional, and broader meta-narrative terms and by limiting  possible combinations of semiosis and semiotic practices in a given semiotic  order. Material factors also operate here through conjunctural or institutionalized  power relations, path-dependency, and structurally-inscribed selectivities.  c) Retention of some resonant discourses (e.g., inclusion in an actor’s habitus,  hexis, and personal identity, enactment in organizational routines, integrated into  institutional rules, objectification in the built environment, material and intellectual  technologies, and articulation into widely accepted accumulation strategies, state  projects, or hegemonic visions). The greater the range of sites (horizontally and  vertically)8 in which resonant discourses are retained, the greater is the potential  for effective institutionalization and integration into patterns of structured  coherence and durable compromise. The constraining influences of complex,  reciprocal interdependences will also recursively affect the scope for retaining  resonant discourses.


 10  
d) Reinforcement insofar as procedural devices exist that privilege these  discourses and associated practices and also filter out contrary discourses and  practices. This can involve both discursive selectivity (e.g., genre chains, styles,  identities) and material selectivity (e.g., the privileging of certain dominant sites of  discourse in and through structurally-inscribed strategic selectivities of specific  organizational and institutional orders). Such mechanisms recursively strengthen  appropriate genres, styles, and strategies and selectively eliminate inappropriate  alternatives and are most powerful where they operate across many different  sites to promote complementary discourses within the wider social ensemble.  e) Selective recruitment, inculcation, and retention by relevant social groups,  organizations, institutions, etc., of social agents whose predispositions fit  maximally with the preceding requirements.
edited by M. McKee, J. Healy, and J. Falkingham, pp. 67–75. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Field, M. G., and J. L. Twigg. 2000. Russia’s Torn Safety Nets: Health and Social Welfare During the Transition. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Gamkredlidze, A., R. Atun, G. Gotsadze, and L. MacLehose. 2002.Health Care Systems in Transition: Georgia. Copenhagen: European Observatory on Health Care Systems.
Hopkinson, B., D. Balabanova, M. McKee, and J. Kutzin. 2004. ‘‘The Human Perspective on Health Care Reform: Coping with Diabetes in Kyrgyzstan.’’ International Journal of Health Planning Management 19: 43–61.
Hovhannisyan, S. G., E. Tragakes, S. Lessof, H. Aslanian, and A. Mkrtchyan. 2001. Health Care Systems in Transition: Armenia. Copenhagen: European Observatory on Health Care Systems.
Institute forAdvanced Studies. 2003.EU-Copernikus Project Living Conditions Lifestyle and Health. Vienna: Institute for Advanced Studies. Available at: http://www.llh.at.
The collapse of the twin towers destroyed 13 million square feet of real estate, and 30% 
of superior office space in downtown New York. But this accounts for only 4% of the 
total office space situated in Manhattan. One estimate of the real and human capital costs 
ranges from 25 to 60 billion dollars (Becker and Murphy 2001). Another study estimates 
the human capital loss to be 40 billion dollars, and the property loss to be between 10 and 
13 billion dollars (Navarro and Spencer 2001). Yet another estimate of the total direct 
loss is 21.4 billion dollars (International Monetary Fund 1989). Looking at the extent of 
destruction relative to the overall US productive capacity indicates that the damage was 
minor (Brauer 2002). The estimates of between 10 and 60 billion dollars worth of damage 
resulting from the attacks of September 11, 2001 is relatively small compared to the 
American GNP of 10 trillion dollars.
                                                   11 Other studies that discuss the impact of terrorism on urban development are Bram et al. (2002), Harrigan and Martin (2002), Mills (2002) and Wildasin (2002).


- 17 -

However, the indirect costs may be substantial. They consist of the induced cost of doing 
business, for instance longer waitings at airports, higher friction and transactions costs in 
international trade, as well as the cost of the military and civilian resources used to fight 
terrorism. To achieve a significant reduction in the probability of falling prey to a terrorist 
attack is certainly expensive. The fraction of the economic potential that can be used for 
consumption today and in the future is significantly reduced. But it is impossible to attach 
any serious figure to these factors. This is particularly so if the effects outside the United 
States are also taken into account. Based on a computable general equilibrium model 
(Walkenhorst and Dihel 2002), it has been estimated that the indirect cost of increased 
economic friction in international trade is larger for other regions of the world than for 
North America.
9. National income and growth. Estimating the overall effect of terrorism on the 
economy12 is faced with the problem of how the economy would have developed if there 
had been less terrorism, or no terrorism at all. To construct a counterfactual is not easy.
An interesting attempt has been made for the Basque country, with a “synthetic” control 
region made up of other Spanish regions, but in many ways resembling the relevant 
economic characteristics of the Basque country before the onset of political terrorism by 
the ETA in the 1970s (Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003). The subsequent economic 
development of this counterfactual synthetic region is compared to the actual experience 
of the Basque country. It is estimated that, after the outbreak of terrorism, the per capita 
GDP in the Basque country fell by about 10 percentage points relative to the control 
region. This gap tends to widen when terrorist activities are on the increase. If the 
terrorist activities by the ETA had a negative economic effect on other Spanish regions 
(included in the synthetic control), the GNP gap estimated for the Basque country is a                                                    12 The effect of general political instability (or stable political institutions, alternatively) on the growth of national income has been analyzed using cross section data by Barro (1991), Alesina et al. (1996) and Acemoglu et al. (2001) among others. The latter studies also address the problem of reverse causality: as argued by Olson (1982), political instability may not only be a cause but also an effect of economic fluctuations. The same might be true in the case of terrorism. A notable study analyzing the effect of income and education on terrorism is a paper by Krueger and Maleckova (2003). On the basis of a variety of evidence, such as the influence of living standards on the support for violent attacks by Palestinians on Israelis expressed in opinion polls and a comparison of the characteristics of the Hezbollah activists killed with those of the general Lebanese population, the authors conclude that terrorism is not a response to bad economic conditions: “[T]he evidence we have assembled does not indicate a connection between poverty and terrorism, and we are not aware of compelling evidence that points in the opposite direction” (Krueger and Maleckova 2003, p. 121).
In general, some of the NOS activities were content-embedded, while others were generic. An example of a content-embedded activity was the fossil activity. In this activity, preservice teachers were provided with fossil fragments and asked to draw detailed representations of these fragments. Students were then asked to infer and draw the remainder of the fossilized organism. They were 


THE NATURE OF SCIENCE AND INSTRUCTIONAL PRACTICE 421 
SCE (WILEJ) RIGHT INTERACTIVE 
short standard long 
also asked to make inferences regarding their organisms’ habitats and sources of nutrition. This activity was then related to the scientific activities of paleobiologists, tentativeness in science, the theory-laden nature of scientific observations and inferences, the use of creativity in the development of scientific knowledge, and the necessity of empirical evidence. All of these aspects were explicitly discussed after preservice teachers had presented their inferred “organisms” to the rest of the class. On the other hand, most of the generic activities were of the “black-box” variety. In such activities, students were shown a particular phenomenon and asked to infer how it works. Students were then asked to design and construct models that mimic the behavior of the original phenomenon without ever “seeing” what was inside the “black-box.” Ensuing discussions focused on the distinction between observations and inferences, the role of models and theoretical constructs in science, the tentative nature of scientific knowledge, and the role of creativity in devising scientific explanations. It might be argued that these activities should have been embedded in the history of science. However, the results of research focusing on the effectiveness of the historical approach in enhancing learners’ conceptions of the NOS are ambivalent at best (Russell, 1981).
The specific aspects of the NOS emphasized by the program are identical to those delineated at the beginning of this report. Furthermore, within coursework related to science curriculum, the preservice teachers are provided with the history and the rationale for the development of the NOS as a central instructional objective.
Procedures Data collection was continuous and spanned the entire calendar year in which participants were 
enrolled in the program. Numerous data sources were used to answer the questions of interest. At the end of the fall term coursework, but prior to the student teaching internships, the preservice teachers were administered a questionnaire to assess their conceptions of the NOS (see Appendix). This questionnaire consisted of seven open-ended items and was intended to be used in conjunction with follow-up interviews (Lederman & O’Mally, 1990). The aspects of the NOS assessed were the tentative, empirical, creative, and subjective nature of science; the role of social and cultural contexts in science; observation versus inference; and the functions and relationships of theories and laws (see Appendix for the aspects of the NOS that the various questionnaire items aimed to assess). The questionnaires were not analyzed until the end of the data collection process to avoid biasing other phases of data collection and/or analysis. This approach represents a significant improvement over similar investigations in which researchers were aware of their subjects’ conceptions of the NOS prior to completing what were intended to be objective (or low inference) analyses of the relationship between teachers’ conceptions and instructional practice.
The researchers collected copies of all participants’ daily lesson plans for the 12-week student teaching, as well as classroom videotapes, and supervisors’ clinical observation notes (supervisors made weekly field observations). Each participant’s portfolio, a requirement for the completion of the MAT program, was also used as a data source. Portfolios consisted of two full units (12–16 days each) of instruction, including rationales, goals, objectives, lesson plans, assessment instruments, reflections on the success of individual lessons and the unit as a whole, and videotapes of classroom instruction. These data sources were analyzed to document whether the preservice teachers planned to teach or taught the NOS explicitly.
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 745 


GS rate over the period ~Azerbaijan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Kazakhstan, Liberia, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Saudi Arabia,Yemen, Zambia!, eight countries have trade openness and all countries have FDI openness above the median+ While at the same time, of the ten countries with the highest GS rate ~Belize, Botswana, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Namibia, Seychelles, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand!, there are also nine and seven countries with trade and FDI openness, respectively, above the median+ Clearly, one obvious characteristic of the countries with very low GS rates is that they are mostly natural resource-intensive economies ~this can also be clearly discerned from Figures 1 to 3!+ Our multivariate estimations reported below indeed show that resource-intensity is an important determinant of GS+We also take this as further reason to test our hypothesis in a subsample of resource-intensive economies+ A characteristic of the countries with high GS rates is that some of them clearly have high per capita incomes+ This factor points toward the need to control for per capita income to ensure that our measures of trade and FDI openness ~as well as economic freedom! do not spuriously pick up an effect that truly belongs to the level of economic development+ It also prompts us to test our hypotheses in subsamples of developing and low-income countries+ 
Turning to our multivariate analysis, Table 1 presents the results of trade and FDI’s effects on the GS rate using three estimation procedures, the random effects GLS, the GEE, and the PCSE methods+ As seen there, in columns ~1! and ~2!, both trade and FDI dependence are positively and statistically significantly asso-

FIGURE 1. Period mean values of logged trade openness (horizontal) and genuine savings rates (vertical axis) 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 16042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:746 
?
?
?
746 International Organization 


ciated with the GS rate using the random effects GLS method if entered separately into the estimations+ The statistical significance of the trade variable is confirmed in column ~4! when GEE is used, but the FDI variable becomes marginally insignificant in column ~5!+85 Both variables are significant again in columns ~7! and ~8! when the PCSE method is employed+ When both FDI and trade are entered in the regression together—columns ~3!, ~6!, and ~9!—then both variables remain positive with trade retaining its statistical significance, but FDI becoming statistically insignificant+ With a bivariate correlation of r? 0+44, it seems that trade openness masks the effects of FDI on the GS rate, if entered together+ 
When entered into the regressions separately, then, in comparison, trade openness is the substantively more important variable of the two+ A one SD increase in trade openness raises the GS rate by up to 1+5 percentage points, compared to up to 0+86 percentage points for a one SD increase in the FDI measure+ These values do not seem high, but keep in mind that the average GS rate across the period is only 6+95 percent+ Also, the SDs are relatively small for our measures of economic openness as many countries are clustered around the mean value+ If we 
85+ Note that the GEE estimator drops Lebanon from the regression as this country has only one observation in the time period, which is not enough to estimate the necessary correlation statistic for this estimator+ 
FIGURE 2. Period mean values of logged FDI stock (horizontal) and genuine savings rates (vertical axis) 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 17042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:747 
?


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 12  
percentages of the five racial/ethnic groups on a given campus is nearly equal (e.g., 20%, 20%,
20%, 25%, 15%), then it is more likely that a student will interact with someone from a different  
race than on a campus where the percentages of the five groups is varies greatly (e.g., 75%, 5%,
10%, 10%, 0%)   
Second, we tested the effects of “climate for diversity,” or students’ perceptions  
(institutional average) of the emphasis their institution places on encouraging contact among  
students from different economic, social, and racial or ethnic backgrounds. Third, we tested the  
influence of “diversity in coursework,” the extent to which students reported their classes  
included readings or discussions related to diversity. Finally, we modeled a construct which we  
call “diversity press,” by creating a scale made up of the three other diversity measures (seniors  
α=.71; 1st year students α=.66). Diversity press represents the institution’s commitment to and  emphasis on diversity as manifested by the proportional presence of students from different  
backgrounds attending the institution (structural diversity), the extent to which students perceive  
that diversity is valued and important, and the degree to which diversity is featured in the  
curriculum.
In the third and final stage of the analysis, we built a series of hierarchical linear models  
to explore the relationships between students’ engagement with diversity-related activities at  
liberal arts colleges and measures of student engagement in educationally purposeful activities  
and their self reported gains in personal and educational growth. We also examine the impact of  
diversity-related activities on perceptions of student environment and satisfaction.
We calculated effect sizes to assess the magnitude of differences between students’  
experiences with diversity at liberal arts colleges and the types of institutions to help interpret the  
results of the regression equations (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991). The effect size is the proportion  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 13  
of a standard deviation change in the dependent variable as a result of a one-unit change in an  
independent variable. We standardized all of the continuous independent and dependent  
measures in the models, so the unstandardized coefficients represent effect sizes. The larger the  
effect size the more likely the differences between groups represent performance that warrants  
serious discussion and, perhaps, intervention. Taking the advice of Rosenthal and Rosnow  
(1991) we considered an effect size of .10 or less to reflect a trivial difference, between .10 and  
.30 small, between .30 and .50 moderate, and greater than .50 large.
Results  
Table 2 presents the coefficients for first-year students and seniors from the multilevel  
models comparing liberal arts colleges to other types of institutions on average engagement in  
diversity-related experiences and self-reported gains in understanding people from diverse  
backgrounds.  Both first-year and senior students at liberal arts colleges, on average, are more  
likely than their peers at other types of colleges and universities to engage in diversity-related  
activities (effect sizes ranging from .19 to .30). While the effects are somewhat smaller (.10 to  
.23), students at liberal arts colleges reported statistically significantly higher gains in  
understanding diversity than did students at other types of colleges.
This paper studies the strong notion that TV viewing is a case in which the theory of revealed preference does not fully apply: many people watch more TV than they consider good for themselves. The extent of TV viewing is not generally utility maximizing.
The case for mistakes in TV consumption choice can be formulated within a systematic framework: individuals are subject to a self-control problem, mainly induced by the fact that watching TV offers immediate benefits (e.g. entertainment and relaxation) at very low immediate marginal costs. Many costs (e.g. not enough sleep, underinvestment in social contacts, education or career) are only experienced in the future. Individuals with time inconsistent preferences are therefore unable to adhere to the amount of TV viewing they planned or which, in retrospect, they would consider optimal for themselves. This tendency is aggravated when people mispredict future costs because they underestimate utility from socializing and neglect changes in preference due to TV consumption. Extensive TV viewing is, according to this alternative view, the result of mispredicting utility and a selfcontrol problem, leading to a lower level of individual utility than what could be achieved.
It is very difficult to discriminate between the view of optimal TV watching and the view of over-consumption based on observed behavior. How is it possible to assess from the outside whether 4 h TV viewing a day are too much and are actually regretted by the consumer? Neither is there conclusive information about optimal consumption behavior in 
284 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


TV viewers’ reaction to price changes. Whether or not people consistently allocate their time and income, they will react to relative price changes in the consumption of TV watching in the direction predicted by standard economics. Only if people adhere to external commitment devices that limit their future choice sets, their observed behavior indicates that they are subject to self-control problems. Yet, there exists only anecdotal and no systematic evidence for the use of such self-commitment devices (e.g. people put an uncomfortable chair in front of their TV or cancel their cable subscription in order not to watch too much TV or even get rid of their TV).
We pursue a completely different approach and propose data on subjective well-being to study whether people make systematic mistakes in their choice of time devoted to TV watching. Life satisfaction or reported subjective well-being can serve as a proxy for experienced utility as suggested by happiness research. Based on this methodology, it is in principle possible to study whether higher TV consumption lowers an individual’s utility or well-being as suggested by the pessimistic view about people’s TV watching. In our analysis, we explore to what extent standard information on individual TV consumption and subjective well-being can inform the debate.
The empirical analysis studies data from the first wave of the European Social Survey. This is an exceptionally rich data set providing information for more than 42,000 people from 22 different countries for 2002/03. The baseline econometric estimate lends support to the hypothesis of over-consumption: excessive TV viewers, on average, report lower life satisfaction. This negative correlation holds even after controlling for a large number of covariates of individual well-being.
We are aware that this correlation does not imply causation. The causality issue can neither be resolved with an extensive set of control variables in a multiple regression analysis nor with panel data. Instead one would want to study large scale changes in people’s opportunities to watch TV that are set from outside. We are not aware that suitable data, such as a natural experiment, exist. Instead two other aspects of the interrelation between TV consumption and subjective well-being are studied: (i) Whether the utility costs of extensive TV consumption depend on the opportunity cost of time. (ii) Whether TV viewing affects people’s preferences and beliefs.
Subjective time use data are often criticized as being inaccurate or biased. ‘‘Watching television’’ might not be understood in the same way by all respondents, and they might not differentiate between television viewing as primary, secondary or even tertiary activity. Respondents might not even correctly remember all the times they were watching television, or they might revert to social norms or images they would like to have of themselves. Many also seem to translate the ‘‘average day’’ into ‘‘the average day that you watch television’’ (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, p. 60). Nevertheless, answers to such questions seem to be a reliable measure for general television viewing behavior. A comparison of US data shows that different measurement methods give similar average results. In the 1992 SPPA National Survey with nearly 6000 respondents (in which a single question, similar to the one in the European Social Survey, was asked about television viewing), the average television viewing time of 3 h was close to time use data based on much more detailed diary surveys (Robinson & Godbey, 1999, p. 152).
Based on the data described, a microeconomic happiness function is specified. The Life satisfactioni of individual i depends on his or her television consumption TVi and on personal characteristics Xi, as well as on country specific effects Dl in country l: 
Life satisfactioni ¼ b0 þ b1TVi þ c1X i þ c2Dl þ ei As the extent of television consumption is captured in a categorical variable with an openended category for those spending a lot of time watching TV, TV consumption cannot be included as a continuous variable. Instead, we include dummy variables in the regression equation. Those who watch less than half an hour of television a day form the reference group. The 6 categories for people who watch more than half an hour of TV a day are combined into 3 categories.
0% 
5% 
10% 
15% 
20% 
25% 
No time at all Less than 0.5 hour 
0.5 hour to 1 hour 
More than 1 hour, up to 1.5 hours 
More than 1.5 hours, up 
to 2 hours 
More than 2 hours, up to 2.5 hours 
More than 2.5 hours, up 
to 3 hours 
More than 3 hours 
Fig. 3. Reported television consumption in 22 European countries 2002/2003. Data source: European Social Survey.
290 B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 


5. Basic estimation results 
5.1. Partial correlation between TV viewing and life satisfaction 
Table 1 reports the partial correlation between TV consumption and reported life satisfaction. In the first specification, a ordinary least squares estimator is applied. In view of the categorical nature of the dependent variable, a second specification is added, estimating an ordered probit. The similarities in the relative size of the coefficients indicate that the least squares estimator delivers a satisfactory approximation of the partial correlation. As the least squares results are easier to interpret, they are discussed primarily.
People who watch less than half an hour of TV a day are more satisfied with their life, ceteris paribus, than people who choose any other level of TV consumption. For those watching TV for anything between half an hour and 2.5 h, average reported life satisfaction is about 0.l0 points lower than in the reference group of people watching for less than half an hour. The estimated effect is even larger for people watching for more than 2.5 h a day. On average, they report a 0.18 points lower life satisfaction than people in the reference group. All the differences are statistically significantly different from zero, at least at 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 
Switzerland Slovenia Sweden Norway Finland Austria Poland 
Germany Belgium Portugal 
Israel Denmark 
Italy France 
Hungary Luxembourg 
Ireland Spain 
Netherlands Czech Republic United Kingdom 
Greece 
Fig. 4. Heavy television viewers in 22 European countries 2002/2003. Note: Fraction of respondents with more than 3 h reported TV viewing on an average weekday. Data source: European Social Survey.
Flemish nationalists have long considered the Flemish economy to be burdened by  the overall Belgian space economy (Brockmans 1995). Based on holding capital, first  industrial revolution firms, and other traditional sectors, the national economy is  associated with the declining industrial spaces in Wallonia. Flemish nationalists  criticized the close links between the Belgian political elite and the francophone  


 27  
holding bourgeoisie, mainly organized around the Société Générale. These close  links were partly based on the relations forged through the Belgian holdings’ strong  presence in government procurement and infrastructure markets. Following the  economic crisis of the 1970s, Flemish nationalists argued that this holding structure  was blocking a thorough restructuring of outmoded or crisis-prone affiliated sectors  and companies in the Belgian space economy. They also complained that these  delays in restructuring were reinforced by the state support that the holding  bourgeoisie, the Walloon socialist party and the Walloon trade unions could secure  for loss-making companies through their privileged access to the Belgian  government. Such subventions were said to divert money from future-directed  economic investments, particularly for Flanders. Thus the foreign raid on the SG was  applauded by Flemish nationalists because it would destroy the economic base of  the Belgian francophone bourgeoisie and cause the disintegration of the Belgian  space economy. It would also force SG to restructure and release its control over  many (also Flemish) companies, which could then regain their dynamism.
However, the Flemish nationalists also worried that the French acquisitions of SG  and several big former state companies in the infrastructure and financial sector  (e.g., Distrigas, Belgacom and ASLK) would actually increase francophone control  over the strategic sectors of the Flemish economy. This shows that, despite the  Flemish nationalist critique of the lack of dynamism and entrepreneurialism of the  Belgian holdings, their economic imaginaries share the same traditional economic  nationalist identification of national companies with national power. The fact that the  French companies were especially targeting Belgian holdings closely related to the  government (infrastructure and public procurement) meant that the acquired  companies such as Electrabel, Tractebel and Distrigas could not be used as vehicles  for Flemish geo-economic and geo-political purposes and/or as the basis for an  autonomous Flemish bourgeoisie and the advancement of Flemish economic nationbuilding. This argument is based on the national ownership version of the anchoring  strategy. The corporate governance version also questioned the activities of Suez on  the grounds that it is a holding company rather than because it is French – and this  deviation from the best corporate governance standards mattered more than the  nationality and political ties of the companies concerned.


 28  
Despite the discursive resonance (and hence retention) of the Flemish anchoring  theme among a significant part of the Flemish political, intellectual and economic  elites and its inclusion in the Flemish state project in the first half of the 1990s, the  Flemish anchoring discourse has not been consolidated in institutional terms.  Economically, the strategy has failed to mobilize the social forces needed to realize a  structural transformation of the socio-economic relations of the economy in Flanders.  Flemish capital is too small and insufficiently institutionalized to mobilize the financial  resources to anchor the privatized state companies or holdings such as Société  Générale. The Flemish merchant bank Lessius was a case in point. It was  established in 1988 to create the financial structures for Flanders to intervene in  important economic events such as the acquisition struggle around SG. Trends’ chief  editor, Crols, regarded Lessius as a triumphant part of the emerging ‘Generale  Maatschappij van Vlaanderen’ (‘SG of Flanders’) and said that it signalled the  professionalisation of the Flemish business world (Crols 1988d). Lessius never lived  up to these expectations. Despite its strong embedding in Flemish economic  networks such as the Vlerick network, it failed to gain the size required to play its  intended strategic role and was dissolved in 2005 (Desmet 2005). Apart from the lack  of institutionalisation of Flemish capital, much of its economic basis lies in the service  and non-monopolized industrial sectors that depend on the presence of foreign  multinational companies in Flanders. Many Flemish economic decision-makers are  thus more interested in maintaining the conditions for the reproduction of foreign  monopoly capital in Flanders than in developing an economic basis for the Flemish  nation (Roosens 1981). Nor has introducing corporate governance into Flanders  increased Flemish strategic decision-making power. Recent economic events (see,  for example, Suez’s acquisition of Electrabel) show that majority shareholders call  the shots, however competent the local managers. More generally, one could argue  that economic imaginaries based on a strong sense of boundedness are likely to fail  as economic spaces are increasingly linked by cross-border networks.
In economic theory, addiction is not necessarily considered to be irrational or suboptimal. In the model of rational addiction (Becker &Murphy, 1988), addicts maximize their current and future utility under stable preferences. More recent work questions this rationality assumption in the case of addictive goods. Addictive behavior has, for example, successfully been modeled with time-inconsistent preferences (e.g. Gruber & Koszegi, 2001; O’Donoghue&Rabin, 1999a, 2002). In thesemodels, individuals, due to their hyperbolic discounting, put more emphasis on the present as compared to all other periods of time and tend to grab immediate rewards. Gruber and Mullainathan (2005) test empirically if smokers have time inconsistent preferences and are therefore subject to self-control problems. They show that predicted smokers (i.e. people who would smoke with some probability given some tax level) would be happier if cigarette taxes were higher. This result is inconsistent with models of rational addiction in which higher prices reduce utility.
Time inconsistent preferences and self-control problems have been confirmed in many laboratory experiments (for an overview see e.g. Frederick, Loewensteinm, & O’Donoghue, 2002), and they have been applied to other areas than addiction.6 Recent empirical evidence from the field is presented for saving decisions (Angeletos, 2001), food consumption (Cutler, Glaeser, & Shapiro, 2003; Shapiro, 2005), job search (DellaVigna & Paser-man, 2005), labor supply (Fang & Silverman, 2006) or health club visits (DellaVigna & Malmendier, 2006).
6 For formal models of time inconsistent preferences, see e.g. Laibson (1997) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a, 1999b) and references mentioned therein.
B.S. Frey et al. / Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (2007) 283–313 287 


Regarding television consumption, there is some (anecdotal) evidence that individuals may have self-control problems. 40% of US adults and 70% of US teenagers admit that they watch too much TV (Kubey & Czikszentmihalyi, 2002). Another interesting observation is that short and long term evaluations of TV consumption tend to diverge – or, as Robinson and Godbey (1999, p. 299) put it: ‘‘We may not enjoy television in general, but the programs we saw last night were pretty good.’’ Some individuals totally abstain from watching TV because they know that they would not otherwise be able to control their television viewing behavior. They cancel their subscription for cable TV in order not to ‘‘zap’’ too much, lock their TV set away in a cupboard or place an uncomfortable chair in front of it. Such self-control mechanisms are not necessary for time consistent individuals. To lower the utility, or raise the cost, of an undesired alternative would be irrelevant and unnecessary.
Here, the role of self-control problems and of mispredicting future costs and benefits in TV viewing is addressed with regard to consumers’ utility. It is hypothesized that, for people facing similar restrictions, heavy TV viewing indicates impeded self-control rather than a taste for TV. Accordingly, heavy TV consumption is expected to result in lower utility.7 
This hypothesis has, of course, to be understood ceteris paribus. Individual utility depends on a large number of other factors, which have to be taken into account in order to identify the specific effect of TV on utility. In the empirical analysis, utility is proxied by life satisfaction, and the effects are partial, controlling for major socio-demographic factors normally included in a happiness equation (see e.g. Frey & Stutzer, 2002a, 2002b).
4. Data on TV consumption and life satisfaction 
In order to empirically address the basic hypothesis on TV over-consumption, the first wave of the European Social Survey (ESS) is used. The ESS is a survey that was carried out in 22 European countries in 2002/2003. In each country, about 1200–3000 people were interviewed. For 338 observations, data for life satisfaction or television viewing is missing, resulting in a sample of 42,021 observations.
  
The Melanesian worldview incorporates humans and animals, the seen and the unseen,
the living and the dead, in a way that is vastly different from the European outlook  
(Flannery, 1998). What Europeans call ‘supernatural’ factors are for Papua New  
Guineans simply the non-visible parts of a single continuum of life. Indeed, they are  
eminently ‘natural’ (p. 200). Because of its divine origin, McLaughlin (1996) highlights  
several features in describing Melanesian concepts of knowledge. Firstly, unlike  
Western knowledge, which is meant to be challenged, Melanesian knowledge was finite  
and not tested. It dictated a set of moral principles that guided behaviour and maintained  
the spiritual strength of the community. The young learners were schooled in the  
accurate reproduction of received knowledge and customs. At no point were they  
encouraged to question or innovate as these would alienate them from adult society  
(McLaughlin, 1995). Similarly, Emery and Patton (1997) assert that in many indigenous  
cultures, the elders speak the truth and the hunters’ words are unquestioned. Indigenous  
people understand that there are different qualities of knowledge from people who have  
different levels of experience and wisdom, so they accept the knowledge the way it is  
presented. They do not attempt to challenge the wisdom of an elder.


 5  
  
  
Finally, most of these Melanesian students have not seen, let alone experienced, the  
examples of concepts that teachers use to explain science, such as traffic lights, solar  
water heaters, air conditioners, vacuum flasks, jet aircraft. This lack of exposure can  
alienate the students from the information presented and their teacher (Koosimile,
2004). That is, students are implicitly taught to devalue traditional knowledge and are  
not exposed to indigenous knowledge with which they are familiar as examples of  
scientific concepts. Naijke (2004) found that teachers’ and students’ understanding of  
science concepts were influenced by their worldviews. Also, the background of the  
student was reflected in whether they held naïve, transitional or canonical views of the  
nature of science. These students with different worldviews can face a dilemma when  
exposed to Western science as how can they accommodate or process both worldviews  
(Aikenhead, 2001). Unfortunately, there is a tendency for students to view Western  
science as desirable and superior to local knowledge (Siegel, 2002; Waldrip & Taylor,
1999a) and that their knowledge of it is related to their later success.
  
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY  
  
Teaching and learning science in PNG has always being a dilemma because the students  
come from different tribal groupings where cultural ideas and beliefs are a reality in  
their minds. Baker and Taylor (1995) reviewed an integrated research on how culture  
affected the learning of science in non-western countries. They claimed that attempt to  
nationalise western science curricular was ineffective because of the disconnectedness  
between the students’ worldviews and school views. Their study identified a  
relationship between language use and concept development. It stated that ‘personal  
construction of meaning in science is related to the linguistic background of the learner  
and compatibility of the learner’s language with that of science education (p. 697)’.

QUESTIONS 1+ Au: “Catastrophe” OK as set?
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025Q 101 05023005 4:09 PM 
?
?
?


False Prophet, or Genuine Savior? Assessing the Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development, 1980–99 Indra de Soysa and Eric Neumayer 
Abstract While many herald globalization—the increasing interconnectedness of national economies—to be associated with rising standards of living across the globe, others fear its effects on sustainability+ Antiglobalization forces and environmentalists view these developments as a threat to the welfare of future generations because of profligate and excessive current consumption+ This study is the first to estimate the effects of dependence on trade, foreign direct investment ~FDI!, and an index of economic freedom on the World Bank’s measure of sustainability ~the genuine savings rate!, which measures the rate at which investment in the total stock of manufactured, human, and natural capital exceeds its depreciation+ Contrary to pessimists’ fears, our indicators of economic openness show positive effects on sustainability, results that are robust to sample size, testing procedure, and several alternative specifications+ The results support those who suggest that distorted economies tend to be both inefficient and damaging to future generations+ If increasing trade, FDI, and economic freedom are hallmarks of globalization, then worries about its effects on future well-being are misplaced+ 
Although many view growing economic interdependence as good for global prosperity, others fear its effects on sustainability+1 The pessimists expect the fierce competition resulting from market globalization and enhanced economic freedom to push countries into unsustainable patterns of resource depletion and economic production, maximizing current profits at the expense of future welfare+2 Optimists, including most economists, argue instead that market globalization and economic freedom lead to a more efficient allocation of resources by enhancing the 
Equal authorship+ We are grateful to Erich Weede, Rick Auty, Simon Dietz, Paul Hensel, Jonathan Moses, Ragnar Torvik, Jostein Vik, Paivi Lujala, two reviewers, and the editor for comments and suggestions++ The anonymous reviewers were extraordinarily constructive+Any remaining errors are entirely our fault+ The data are available at ^http:00www+svt+ntnu+no0iss0Indra+de+Soysa0default+htm&+ 
1+ See Mikesell 1992; Neumayer 2003; Pearce and Warford 1993; and World Commission on Environment and Development 1987+ 
2+ See MacNeill, Winsemius, and Yakushiji 1991; and Meadows, Meadows, and Randers 1993+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 1042 05023005 4:23 PM 
?
?
Discussion 
Our results suggest a complex mix of determinants of asylum migration. There is clear evidence that economic factors matter. The estimated elasticity of average per capita income is almost unitary in column I of Table 3, suggesting that a 1 percent increase in income is associated with a 1 percent decrease in the number of asylum seekers. A 1 percentage point lower economic growth rate raises the number of asylum seekers by about 0.02 percent. While this is small, economic growth also has an indirect effect via raising the level of income. A 1 percent increase in the number of existing asylum seekers in the recent past raises the number of asylum seekers by a relatively small 0.09 percent. A 1 percent increase in the distance to Western Europe lowers the number of asylum seekers by 1.33 percent (column II of Table 3). More populous countries send more asylum seekers, but not proportional to their population size as the estimated elasticity is substantially below unity. The coefficients of the other variables are more difficult to interpret. Variables are measured in different units and have different distributions, which is why the estimated coefficients cannot be compared directly with each other. Taking a one 
ERIC NEUMAYER 403 


standard deviation (SD) increase in a variable to represent a ‘‘substantial’’ increase, Table 4 shows the percentage increase in asylum seekers following a substantial increase in an explanatory variable.16 It clearly shows that the impact of changes in the economic variables and in existing asylum networks is substantively important. However, the substantive importance of human rights violations, dissident violence, ethnic/civil war, and state failure as well as external conflict is not negligible either. Note that because of the nonlinear effect of AUTOCRACY, the estimated percentage increase following a one SD increase in this variable depends of course on the initial value of the variable. An increase from one SD below the mean toward the mean increases the number of asylum seekers by more than 133 percent. The turning point after which a further increase in autocracy leads to a reduction in the number of asylum seekers can be estimated as (? d/2f), where d is the coefficient of the autocracy variable and f the coefficient of the squared term. The estimated turning point for the Freedom House index, which runs from 2 to 14, is about 13.1 in column I, 13.5 in column II, and 11.8 in column III. In other words, only in the most restrictive autocracies can the limitations typically imposed on emigration in such regimes be expected to outweigh the incentive to migrate away from political repression. What accounts for the fact that the genocide/politicide, famine, and natural dis-

aster variables all turn out to be insignificant? One explanation is that people fleeing from these events are likely to remain in neighboring developing countries and/ or become IDPs within their own country, which is why studies looking at refugee and IDP flows in developing countries find them to be statistically significant, particularly the genocide/politicide variable. Another explanation could be that these tend to be short-term and one-off events. In contrast, poverty, economic discrimination against ethnic minorities, human rights violations, autocratic regime, and even civil/ethnic warfare are more persistent events. Given that migration to Western Europe probably requires some planning and preparation, we are not surprised to find that factors to which people are exposed to more persistently over time are more significant determinants of asylum migration to Western Europe than are short-term and one-off events. This might even explain the fact that we find only some evidence that external armed conflict matters. Such conflicts are not only very infrequent compared with ethnic/civil war and state failure, but they also tend to have a short duration (Slantchev, 2003).
TABLE 4. Estimated Percentage Increase in Asylum Seekers Following a One SD Increase in an Independent Variable 
Variable % Increase 
ln ASYLUMSTOCK 103.39 ln GDP per capita ? 77.78 GROWTH ? 11.88 ECONDISCRIMINATION 25.63 AUTOCRACY (at one SD below the mean) 133.25 RIGHTSVIOLATION 36.26 DISSIDENTVIOLENCE 11.13 DOMWAR/STATEFAIL 15.28 EXTERNALWAR 11.40 ln POPULATION 62.24 ln DISTANCE ? 126.33 
16 We list only variables with statistically significant coefficients in column III of Table 3, to which the results refer.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

             Figure1 about here  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Neural Network Models for Rare Events: A Balanced Training Set with Cross-Validation 
Interstate conflict data are often coded as binary dependent variables, with zero as by far 
the most common value.  This implies that a dataset of such events will be characterized by an 
unbalanced dependent variable, with important consequences for the analysis and prediction of 
interstate disputes with neural network models as with other multivariate models.  In such rare 
event domains the estimated event probability may be so small as to make efficient event 
prediction very difficult (King and Zeng 2000).  Unbalanced datasets also affect the performance 
of neural network models.  The learning process that neurally-based models use to update their 
weight estimates is biased toward commonly encountered (modal) values in the training sample 
(Garson 1998: 88).  Consequently, practical strategies need to be developed, during the training 
phase, to improve the neural networks’ prediction ability for rare events.
The neural network literature has given little attention to the rare event problem.  Few 
attempts have been made to address it, and the results have not been very successful.  Schrodt’s 
(1991) experimental work on conflict data utilizes a replication strategy to increase the number 
of conflict cases in the training set.  It does increase prediction in the training set, but at the cost 
of reducing the model’s ability to correctly classify new cases.  Missing is a correction strategy 
to reduce the bias produced by intentionally selecting training cases on the dependent variable.


10 
To develop a practical procedure that increases accuracy in the neural network 
classification of rare events, we extend a strategy, suggested by King and Zeng (2000) for 
logistic regression models, to the neural network approach.  This solution focuses on selecting 
data on the basis of the dependent variable (endogenous stratified sampling) while, at the same 
time, using a statistical correction (prior correction) for the logistic estimates to avoid selection 
bias.  In the neural network analysis, instead of directly correcting the estimates, as Beck, King 
and Zeng (2000) suggest, the correction mechanism is provided indirectly by the cross-validation 
set.  However, both corrections rely on the same principle, which is based on prior information 
about the incidence of the rare event in the population, Ƭ.
As with any form of data analysis, the meaningfulness of a neural network prediction 
depends heavily on the extent to which the relevant explanatory variables are selected and 
included among the network input.  If important explanatory variables are omitted, the neural 
network models cannot produce meaningful predictions.  Assuming that the important 
explanatory variables for the classification have been selected by the researcher and used as the 
network inputs, we can think of two reasons for poor performance by neural network classifiers 
that utilize unbalanced training sets: 1) the inadequate type of information that the unbalanced 
training set provides, and 2) the way in which the learning algorithm, which is used during the 
backpropagation process, minimizes the prediction error and changes the weight values.
Regarding the first point, many political scientists (e.g., Maoz and Russett 1993: 627) 
suggest that most of the non-conflict cases provide the model with little information.  The data 
on these dyads is often similar and repetitive, as many of the conditions allowing stability show 
little variation.  More information lies where the action (conflict) is, since disputes are often 
preceded by changes in other patterns of international interaction.  Moreover, since researchers 


11 
commonly believe that conditions causing international conflicts are highly non-linear and 
interactive, the effect of the explanatory variables (the neural network’s inputs) may vary widely 
over the observations.  Whereas the effect of many explanatory variables may be undetectable 
for most dyads--the non-conflict ones--it may be very substantial for the conflict cases.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin Murphy (2001). Prosperity Will Rise out of the Ashes. Wall Street Journal,
October 29, 2001.
Berrebi, Claude and Esteban F. Klor (2004). On Terrorism and Electoral Outcomes: Theory and Evidence from the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. Mimeo, New Jersey: Princeton University.
Blomberg, S. Brock, Gregory Hess and Athanasios Orphanides (2004a). The Macroeconomic Consequences of Terrorism. CESifo Working Paper No. 1151, Munich: CESifo.
Blomberg, S. Brock, Gregory Hess and Akila Weerapana (2004b). Economic Conditions and Terrorism.
European Journal of Political Economy 20(2): 463-478.
3 Terrorism’s impact on various aspects of the economy 
Over the last few years, scholars have analyzed the effects terrorist acts have on various 
aspects of the economy. In the following, the results for tourism, foreign direct 
investment, savings and consumption, investment, stock markets, foreign trade, the urban 
economy (including the costs of the attacks of September 11, 2002), and overall 
economic development are surveyed.
1. Tourism. Tourists have become a frequent target of terrorist activities in recent years,6 
generating huge resonance in the media. Examples are the Luxor massacre in 1997, in 
which members of an Egyptian Islamic group shot dead 58 foreign tourists visiting the 
temple of Queen Hatshepsut in the Valley of the Queens, and the bombing of a disco in 
                                                   6 It is argued that tighter security measures for military and government facilities made tourists relatively more attractive for terrorist attacks (see e.g. Im et al. 1987).


- 7 -

Bali in 2002, costing the lives of almost 200 tourists. There is a simple rationale for these 
attacks. Individuals planning their holidays are less likely to choose a destination with a 
higher threat of terrorist attacks. Host countries providing tourism services, which can be 
easily substituted are, therefore, negatively affected by terrorist attacks to a substantial 
extent. The expected reactions from consumers make the bombing, shooting and 
kidnapping of tourists attractive strategies for terrorists who want to inflict economic 
damage, when pursuing their political goals. There is a fast growing literature evaluating 
the effects of terrorism on tourism, focusing on the number of tourists and lost revenues 
in the industry. Special attention is given to substitution issues and the temporal structure 
of the effects.
In an early, influential paper, Enders and Sandler (1991) study the relationship between 
international terrorism and tourism in Spain. They use monthly data on terrorist incidents 
and combine it with the number of foreign visitors in Spain between 1970 and 1988,
applying VAR methodology. It is estimated that a typical terrorist act in Spain scares 
away over 140,000 tourists, when all the monthly impacts are combined. In 1988, 5.392 
million foreigners visited Spain and 18 international terrorist incidents took place. Hence 
without these incidents, 1.5 times as many tourists would have visited Spain in 1988.
Careful econometric analyses reveal similar repercussions from terrorism on other tourist 
destinations. In a time-series analysis based on quarterly terrorism data and the ARIMA 
technique, Enders et al. (1992) quantify the present value of loss in tourism revenues for 
a sample of European countries. According to their calculations, Austria, Italy and Greece 
lost $4.538 billion, $1.159 billion and $0.77 billion respectively between 1974 and 1988 
(in 1988 terms, using a real interest rate of 5%). For comparative purposes, total revenues 
in these countries in 1988 amounted to $11.149 billion, $19.311 billion and $3.29 billion 
respectively. For the same period, continental Europe as a whole lost $16.145 billion due 
to terrorism (total tourist revenues in 1988 were $74.401 billion). Fleischer and Buccola 
(2002) estimate a supply and demand model of the Israeli hotel industry to assess the 
impact of terrorism. Foreign demand and equilibrium prices are allowed to be influenced 
by a monthly index, capturing the severity of the terrorist campaign in Israel. The annual 
revenue shortfalls between 1992 and 1998 in the market with foreign visitors sum up to 
approximately $50 million (1998 present value discounted at 5%) or 1.27% of total 


- 8 -

revenues in this period. Though these revenue losses are relatively modest, they increase 
with a deterioration of the situation. In 1996, a year of Middle East unrest, the revenue 
shortfall amounted to 2.55%. Further, it is claimed that, due to inelastic local demand,
  
Village elders from many tribal groupings are perceived to be the source of wisdom and  
the recognised authority of tribal knowledge (Waldrip & Taylor, 1999b). In many PNG  
traditional societies, traditional knowledge is finite and passed down from generation to  
generation by word of mouth by the older members to the younger generation of the  
tribe as a survival tactic. Such knowledge includes the skills of hunting, trading  
expeditions, building canoes, gardening (planting and harvesting), building shelter,
healing diseases, forecasting weather, initiation ceremonies, funeral rites, protection  
against crocodile, fishing expeditions, and various activities associated with cultural  
heroes. The most respected elder in a community usually conducted the teaching and  
learning that occurred through practical absorption (observation) and participatory  
activity embedded in each villager’s daily life. Specialists teach the tasks to a selected  
few who have gone through the primary and secondary streaming processes by way of  
pre-initiation (Kelontii, 1996). Pre-initiation is mainly done through observing the  


 4  
  
child’s interests at an early age. For example, if a child is found to possess aggressive  
behaviour, he is singled out and given a warrior’s initiation.
  
Traditional knowledge comes from a wide diversity of experience in nature, from  
teaching and apprenticeship, working with the land, by absorbing the feel of the wild  
animals and plants, and by listening to legends and stories (Emery & Patton, 1997).
Therefore traditional knowledge is organised and based on integration, not on analysis  
into parts. In addition, basic assumptions about classification of plants and animals or  
cultural actions and rituals are often very different to those of technology-based  
societies. The characteristics of traditional learning are through observation, imitation,
and verbal instruction; by personal trial and error through demonstrations; mostly with  
real life activities; and being context specific and person oriented (Harris, 1992). In  
many villages, learning of indigenous languages, folklore, personal-social relationships,
traditional vacations and dances and the nature of family structures, still depend heavily  
on these procedures and experiences from the past. During puberty, secret or true  
knowledge concerning the tribe and life originating from the gods were passed on  
through sometimes, painful initiation ceremonies.
· High-bandwidth teleconferencing interfaces: i.e., teleimmersive simulations of  
face-to-face and augmented social interactions (e.g., Lanier, 2001).
· Agent-based e-commerce and help interfaces: An increasing number of quasi-

social relationships with new forms of artificially intelligent beings, such as  
computers themselves and intelligent agents that inhabit virtual environments,
that act as “office assistants,” guides on websites, characters in social 3D virtual  
environments, and team members or opponents in computer games (Petrie,
1996; Reeves and Nass, 1996; Chorafas, 1997; Franklin, 1997; Kushmerick,
1997; Cassell, Sullivan et al., 2000).
· Speech interfaces: Simulations of human speech and social interaction with the  
computer (e.g., Yankelovich, Levow et al., 1995).
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 741 


The missing years for this variable are interpolated+ Because the score on economic freedom changes slowly between the five-year periods measured, the interpolated values should not be problematic+ Strictly speaking, because economic freedom has government size as one of its components, to some extent it also suffers from the problem that its inclusion effectively constructs a partial identity between the left-hand side and right-hind side of the estimation ~see above!+ Fortunately, it is only one out of many components, which should mitigate the problem+ 
Although openness to trade and FDI figure quite prominently in assessing economic freedom, they are but a small part of the overall measure+ The bivariate correlations between economic freedom and trade and FDI, nonetheless, are r ? 0+36 and r ? 0+33 respectively+ Clearly, the indicator of economic freedom captures aspects of open and market-oriented economic policies beyond what trade and FDI alone are able to capture+ Using the economic freedom measure as an added factor in the globalization process has additional value in that much argumentation about globalization’s effects on sustainability reflects fears about growing economic freedom at the expense of government’s ability to regulate the market for the sake of intergenerational equity+ 
The baseline model controls for level of per capita income because richer countries have higher savings rates and supposedly exhibit better environmental standards on several dimensions+64 GNI per capita in purchasing power parity is logged to account for its skewed distribution+ We also include a squared term to allow for a diminishing effect of per capita income on sustainability+ In addition to income, we follow others and account for the structure of production by including the percent+age of GDP devoted to agriculture+65 We control for economic growth, because it is often thought that higher rates of growth require more intensive use of environmental resources+ On the other hand, higher growth may enable increases in other forms of capital, such as manufactured and human capital that reduces the direct dependence of people on natural resources+66 
Savings rates might be negatively affected if a country undergoes a financial currency crisis+ To control for this possibility we include a dummy variable+ This is set to 1 if, following Frankel and Rose, the local currency loses at least 25 percent of its value and the change in the exchange rate exceeds the previous year’s change by at least 10 percent+67 The latter accounts for periods of high inflation+ The change in the exchange rate is defined as the change in the natural logarithm of the nominal bilateral dollar exchange rate+ 
The models include the degree to which countries are dependent on natural resource exports because resource depletion will be higher among these countries+ As the early studies of the GS data indicate, energy-rich states in particular tend 
64+ See Bhagwati 1999; Frankel 2003; Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Serven 2000; Ogaki, Ostry, and Reinhart 1995; and Shafik 1994+ 
65+ Grimes and Kentor 2003+ 66+ See Coxhead and Jayasuriya 2003; and Loayza et al+ 1998+ 67+ Frankel and Rose 1996+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 12042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:742 
?
?
?
742 International Organization 


to have low GS given the high extraction levels of a single resource, coupled with lower than normal investment in human capital, dimensions of the familiar “resource curse” hypothesis highlighted in the literature+68 The resource curse is blamed on economic, political, and social factors, all of which are possible avenues through which sustainability may be hampered+69 We control for resource dependence in two ways+ First, we test a discrete variable that takes the value of one if exports of petroleum are greater than 50 percent of GDP+ This measure is obtained from an independent source+70 Secondly, we employ continuous measures for fuels and ores and mineral exports in total merchandise exports+71 
Democracy, it is often argued, is good for environmental protection because it empowers people and provides channels through which governments can be influenced by civil society+72 Democracy also enhances international environmental coop-
eration+73 The rise of green movements, nongovernmental organizations, and other activist movements within democracies is seen as proof of this+ Democracy also relates to trade openness, with many arguing that democracy increases openness+74 Moreover, democracy also affects the gross savings rate as politics drive tax policies and affect the issue of corruption and rent-seeking behavior+ We use the standard Polity IV ~version 2! data+75 We subtract autocratic values from the democratic values and add 11 to create a scale from 1 to 21+We construct a dummy variable for regime type by assigning the value 1 if democracy ranges from 16–21, and 0 if the values are between 1 and 15 ~autocracy!+ This variable correlates perfectly with others who have used the Polity data in a similar manner+76 
In addition, we include two further measures of governance as control variables+ One is the political constraints ~polcon! index developed by Henisz+77 He has designed his index as an indicator of the ability of political institutions to make credible commitments to an existing policy regime, which he argues is the most relevant political variable of interest to investors+ Building on a simple spatial model of political interaction, the index makes use of the structure of government in a given country and the political views represented by the different levels of government ~that is, the executive, the legislature!+ It measures the extent to which political actors are constrained in their choice of future policies by the existence of other political actors who will have to consent+ Scores range from 0, which indicates that the executive has total political discretion and could change existing policy regimes at any point of time, to 1, which indicates that a change of existing 
68+ See Atkinson and Hamilton 2003; and Hamilton 2001+ 69+ See Auty 2001; Gylfason 2000; Ross 1999; and Sachs and Warner 2001+ 70+ Easterly and Sewadeh 2001+ 71+ These variables are obtained from World Bank 2002+ 72+ See Dryzek 1997; Frankel 2003; and Midlarsky 2000+ 73+ Neumayer 2002b+ 74+ Milner 1999+ 75+ Jaggers and Gurr 1995+ 76+ Fearon and Laitin 2003+ 77+ Henisz 2000+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 13042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:743 
?
social presence is treated as self-evident: the other simply is or is not present. This  
binary “non-definition” is used. The key limitation of this approach is that social  
presence is not seen as a continuum. On the other hand, there is research going  
back almost sixty years that indicates that the mere thought of someone else in  
other room or the suggestion that someone is watching has influence on behavior  
(Dashiell, 1935; Wapner and Alper, 1952). Note that this social presence is not a  
physical fact, but a psychological one. The “perceived presence” or another triggers  
significant psychological effects on behavior.
Co-presence  
Are there different degrees of the “presence” of another? Theories clustered  
around the concept of “co-presence” have tended to see what we are calling  
mediated social presence as problematic. The mediated other is not simply “here or  
not-here,” but is present to a lesser or greater degree along some definable  
continuum. Some early researchers in interpersonal communication argued that  
even in unmediated interactions, the simple binary, here-not here conceptualization  
of social presence is unsatisfactory. Nowhere is this made more obvious than in the  
seminal work of the social psychologist, Erving Goffman (Goffman, 1959;  
Goffman, 1963).


    
13  
Sensory awareness of the embodied other. Goffman provides an example of  
a more subtle theoretical analysis of what he called “copresence.” The concept of  
co-presence is grounded on the basic sensory awareness of other.
First, sight begins to take on an added and special role. Each individual can  
see that he is being experienced in some way, and he will guide at least some  
of his conduct according to the perceived identity and initial response of his  
audience. Further, he can be seen to be seeing this, and can see that he has  
been seen seeing this. Ordinarily, then, to use our naked senses is to use  
them nakedly and to be made naked by their use. (Goffman, 1959), p.16  
Emphasis on the senses makes this approach very amenable to mediated  
interaction. In mediated interactions the senses of the user are extended to some  
degree by the technology. The representation of the other makes some minimal or  
intense level of sensory impression. Goffman makes the additional point that the  
co-presence “implies the reception of embodied messages” (p. 15). The body of  
the other is a key medium. In mediated interactions the other is frequently  
embodied by some avatar, agent, or simpler representational device (Cassell,
Sullivan et al., 2000).
Even though he focuses on un-mediated perception, Goffman sees each  
sensory channel as a medium for experiencing social presence.  He is also sensitive  
to the fact that social presence is influenced by subtle properties of the  
environment in which the interaction takes place:  
The physical distance over which one person can experience another with the  
naked senses-thereby finding that the other is “within range”-varies  


    
14  
according to many factors: the sense medium involved, the presence of  
obstructions, even the temperature of the air. (p. 17).
The professional group seemed almost ‘naturally’ to employ a cartographic perspective. In a map-drawing exercise they conceived of West Cumbria as a continuous two-dimensional surface that had various characteristics that came and went as one moved about it. The women in the ex-mining village, by contrast, seemed to conceive of the area in terms of radial excursions away from the village to other places, especially other villages and towns. They had great difficulty completing the map-drawing exercise, clearly being unfamiliar with cartographic ways of thinking at that scale. In the terminology for place developed by the philosopher Edward Casey, they experience West Cumbria as a ‘region’ – as ‘an area concatenated by peregrinations between the places it connects’ (Casey 1996: 24, quoted by Ingold 2000: 227). In Ingold’s terms, they were ‘wayfinders’, moving around within a world, rather than ‘map-readers’ moving across a surface as imagined from above.
Visuality, mobility and the cosmopolitan 125 
British Journal of Sociology 57(1) © London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 


What are we to make of these differences? It is possible to argue that they simply show the uneven distribution of the sort of cognitive capacities necessary for citizenly modes of being-in-the-world. But this does not seem quite right. It is striking how different is the understanding of local distinctiveness promoted by official agencies like the Countryside Commission when compared with that of the non-governmental organization Common Ground.16 In the Countryside Commission approach, places are an accretion of ‘characteristics’ according to abstract categories. In effect, the Countryside Commission’s approach to place is that of the citizen, in whose experience of place there is a moment of self-absenting or abstraction, of seeing it as if from afar or from outside. By contrast, Common Ground encourages the proliferation of vernacular, ideographic and connotative descriptions of local places –  place myths, stories, celebrations, personal associations. Common Ground’s approach is that of the denizen – the person who dwells in a particular place, and has come to know it through moving about within it.
Ingold points out that when someone is in an unfamiliar place and is asked ‘where are we?’ they typically use the abstract, non-indexical language of maps and co-ordinates. But when traveling in a familiar country, the answer is more likely to be the name of a place, accompanied by stories, associations and  memories (Ingold 2000: 237). The language of abstract, visual landscape character is a language of mobility and comparison. It is not simply that the privileged, mobile, cosmopolitan sections of society are better at it; the language is itself an expression of a mobile, abstracted way of being (cf. Schegloff 1968). In Heideggerian terms, the working-class women experienced their locality in terms of its equipmentality – its offering of practical affordances (Heidegger 1967). For them the world was zuhanden, ready-to-hand, known through use. For the mobile, professional group West Cumbria was apprehended in a way that was closer to the cartographic and professional vision of landscape, for which the land is vorhanden, ‘present-at-hand’, known through being  looked at, conceived in terms of objects and predicates, locations and  characteristics.
Thus, as places are increasingly ‘toured’, there is thus a tendency for all places in the end to become cosmopolitan and nomadic. The related shift to a visual economy of nature – the assumption that nature and place are above all to be looked at rather than used and appropriated – assists this ‘de-substantialization’ of place. A given locality becomes not a unique place, with its own associations and meanings for those dwelling or even visiting there, but a particular combination of abstract characteristics, which mark it out  as similar or different, as more or less scenic or characterful than other  places. The pleasures of place come to derive at least in part from the emotions involved in this visual consumption of place. This produces the emotion of movement, of bodies, images and information, of moving over and  
126 Bronislaw Szerszynski and John Urry 
© London School of Economics and Political Science 2006 British Journal of Sociology 57(1) 


across the globe and reflexively monitoring places in terms of abstract  characteristics.
  
METHODOLOGY  
  Village Elders  
  
Initial contacts with all the eight village elders were made through the first author’s  
brother in-law, a respected retired Reverend of the United Church who has invaluable  
knowledge of the structures of the different clans in the village. Morauta (1984) affirms  
this stronghold of Christianity which relates back to the early arrival of Reverend James  
Chalmers in 1881, from the London Missionary Society (LMS) who was the first  
European to visit the two big villages of ‘Uritai’ and ‘Mirihaea’  where a mission  
station was set up in 1884. Several of these elders may have been either educated by the  
early missionaries to Grade 6 and held different positions within the government or  
private sectors and have retired and come back to live in the village. Several of them  
have also been actively involved in church activities in the village and in Port Moresby.
Pou, the oldest is in his late 70s and is the only surviving member of his clan with  
knowledge of folklore. Mora in his early 70s is a known  fisherman and when I met  
him, he was mending his fishing nets. Mesea in his late 50s is a businessman and owns  
a truck which brings garden produce and transports people to and fro from Malalaua and  
Kerema. Mai in his late 60s is a retired government employee and has come back to live  
in the village through fishing and making gardens and is involved in church activities.
He has been involved with the Native Corporative Society business in the village. Ivan,
Tati and Sari in their early 60s have all lived and worked in Port Moresby but have  
retired and moved back to live in the village. They all live through gardening and  
fishing and taking part in church activities. Sevese in his late 60s has been involved with  


 9  
  
the Native Corporative Society business in the village and also lives by gardening and  
fishing.
  
Each of the village elders were interviewed in ‘Toaripi’, the common language spoken  
in this village with which the first author is familiar. In order to ensure that the elders  
perceived the interview process as meaningful, they were told that whatever they said  
was judged not to be right or wrong and would be kept confidential as it was based on  
their own understanding. The initial questions focused on the context of their  
involvement within their village, that is, the ocean or the land environment. Each elder  
was asked about the sand on the beach, what happened to the sand when it was eroded  
and where it was deposited. From where the interview was conducted on the veranda of  
the house, the beach was in full view with the sea and the wind blowing through the  
swaying coconut palm trees. Each elder interviewed fully understood what the interview  
was about and at some stages thought that some of the questions asked were interesting  
such as what is a rainbow, what is lightning and thunder, and what causes the wind to  
blow.
  
Secondary School Students  
  
The students involved in the study came from villages situated either on the coast or  
inland between Cape Possession to the Avei mouth of the Purari River in the Gulf of  
Papua. Most of these students have spent their community schooling in their villages as  
most of these villages have their own community schools. After 6 years of community  
school they sit an entrance examination which qualifies them for a place into Malalaua  
Provincial High School which caters for students around this area. This school is  
situated near Malalaua Station, east of the provincial capital, about 45 kilometres. The  
school is easily accessible both by road and air. The students who mainly attend the  
school come from about 17 different ‘Toaripi’ speaking villages and speak about four  
other languages apart from learning in English which is the medium of instruction in  
schools. They are taught English, Mathematics, Science, Social Science, Commerce,
In definitions that emphasize being in the same space, the notion of co-

presence shares some properties with physical presence.  A number of researchers  
use some variation of social presence as the notion of being in the same location,
space, room, etc. (Mason, 1994; McLeod, Baron et al., 1997; Sallnas, Rassmus-

grohn et al., 2000).
Goffman’s sensory motor approach to the conceptualization of co-presence  
provides him with the basis for a subtle, elaborated, and developed approached to  
social interaction.  Even though it dates back to 1960s and is focused on face-to-

face interaction, Goffman’s emphasis on the sensory accessibility of the embodied  
other can be found explicitly in some social presence work (Biocca and Nowak,
1999; Nowak and Biocca, 1999; Biocca and Nowak, 2001; Nowak and Biocca,
2001).
Mutual awareness. Goffman and others extend the notion of co-presence  
beyond just “being in the same place” to include the attentional issues of mutual  
awareness: “copresence renders persons uniquely accessible, available, and subject  
to one another” (p.22). The definitions of co-presence move into mutual  
awareness when they emphasize attention to the sensory properties of the other,
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe404 


The insignificance of colonial ties is a rather striking result. These ties influence the specific country in which asylum seekers coming to Western Europe will settle (Bo¨cker, 1998; Neumayer 2004a), but former European colonies do not send more asylum seekers into Western Europe as a whole than non-colonies. That religious ties are insignificant confirms studies examining the specific destination choice within the EU (Bo¨cker, 1998; Neumayer 2004a). The same is true for any potential contact established by aid, trade, or flows of tourism. These are likely to be far too casual to have a significant impact upon asylum migration. Like other studies, we find that migration networks and geographical distance are highly significant determinants of asylum migration.
Conclusions 
Are asylum seekers in Western Europe economic migrants or ‘‘genuine’’ refugees? As our analysis is at the aggregate level, we can say nothing definite about individuals. What we can say is that economic conditions in countries of origin are statistically significant and substantively important determinants of aggregate numbers of asylum seekers coming to Western Europe. This implies that policies aimed at improving economic conditions in these countries, such as generous development assistance and the opening of protected European markets to imports from developing countries, can lower the migration pressure from these countries. The pressure on Western Europe will remain as long as income levels are so widely different. Indeed, the divergence in income levels means that the pressure is bound to increase further (Cole and Neumayer, 2003). We find no evidence for a bell-shaped effect of income levels in origin countries on asylum flows, the so-called migration hump, and therefore reject the suggestion that ‘‘poverty reduction is not in itself a migration-reducing strategy’’ (Nyberg-S?rensen, Van Hear, and Engberg-Pedersen, 2002:35) or is so only in the long run (Rotte et al. 1997). At the same time, our results clearly demonstrate the importance of the political 
regime in origin countries and of threats to the personal integrity of individuals from human rights abuse, dissident political violence, civil/ethnic warfare, and state failure as well as possibly external conflict. This result suggests that some of the drivers of forced migration in the developing world as identified by the studies of, for example, Schmeidl (1997), Davenport et al. (2003), as well as Moore and Shellman (2003), are also major determinants of asylum migration to developed countries. It also suggests that the few existing studies of asylum migration to single European countries such as Rotte et al. (1997), Vogler and Rotte (2000) as well as Holzer et al. (2002) might underestimate or not fully capture the effect of violent political conflict in origin countries on asylum migration. In comparison, this study includes a more comprehensive set of variables covering various aspects of political violence. With respect to regime type, our results contradict the findings of Rotte et al. (1997), Vogler and Rotte (2000), and some of the studies of refugee flows in the developing world. The lack of democracy increases asylum migration in our estimations, but often in a nonlinear way, which is not allowed for in these studies and that might partly explain the difference in results. With respect to the asylum migration studies, another reason could be that our research design includes all developing countries of origin, not just those from Africa and Asia. Also, we analyze asylum migration to Western Europe rather than one single destination country. However, the latter is not decisive since in non-reported sensitivity analysis, we restricted the estimations to asylum migration to Germany (rather than Western Europe), which confirmed our results. More importantly, our results put the perception that aggregate numbers of 
asylum seekers coming to Western Europe are merely determined by economic conditions in the countries of origin into great doubt. The spread of democracy around the world can be expected to lower the number of people seeking asylum,
From its emergence as a potential object of calculation and governance with the  formation of an independent Belgian state in 1830, the Belgian economy experienced  highly uneven development. High energy transport costs and a pivotal role for the  


 17  
steel industry in economic development stimulated the rapid industrialization of the  coal-rich Walloon provinces with some spillover into light industry and consumption  goods (Vandermotten et al., 1990). In contrast, the Flemish provinces remained  largely rural and underdeveloped, except for some industrial small pockets around  Ghent (textiles) and Antwerp (port facilities). The seeds of change were planted in  the 1880 economic crisis, however, which was concentrated in Wallonia. This  destroyed the latter’s light industrial and consumer goods sectors and the resulting  lack of diversification and investment became major factors in Walloon economic  decline in the 20th century. The trend towards uneven development was intensified  through the second industrial revolution following the Great Depression (1929-32)  because this particularly benefited the Antwerp region without bringing much  advantage to Wallonia. While the former gained from investments in non-ferrous  metals, carbon- and petro-chemicals, and electricity generation linked partly to its  strategic port location (Vandermotten, Saey and Kesteloot 1990). The selective  nature of this industrialization wave and its close ties to the interests of frenchified  national capital prevented the rise during this period of an autonomous Flemish  space economy and an autonomous Flemish bourgeoisie. At the same time, the  legacies of previous rounds of investment in Wallonia left little social or geographical  room for an industrial restructuring policy. Accordingly Belgian national financial  capital sought a new spatial fix in response to lack of investment opportunities in this  regard by resorting to foreign investments, mainly in the Congo and China (cf. the  general model in Harvey 1982). Paradoxically this pattern of uneven development  between the Flemish and Walloon regions saw the final integration of a Belgian  space economy based on the Antwerp-Brussels-Charleroi industrial axis. This was  achieved through the centralization of capital on the national level, in which the  Belgian holding company, Sociéte Générale, played a key role, so that it viewed the  whole of the Belgian economy as a relatively unified object of economic calculation  shaped by the dynamic of the so-called A-B-C axis.
Regarding language, although a majority of the population still spoke various Flemish  dialects when the Belgian state was created in 1830, the new government decreed  that French would be the sole official language. This reflected the interests of the  largely francophone elite, including frenchified ‘Flemings’ (Murphy 1988). At this time  the language division was more social than geographical because the inhabitants of  


 18  
Flanders and Wallonia saw themselves either as commoners with largely local  identities or else as members of the national elite (Murphy 1988; Reynebeau 1995).  The resulting primacy of social over regional-territorial division is reflected in the fact  that the ‘Flemish movement’ that emerged soon after independence among middle  class intellectuals pursued a liberal struggle for individual language rights and  increased bilingualism rather than calling for segregation into unilingual spaces. Only  in the early 20th century did the latter approach replace the liberal conception, which  had envisaged the use of French in Flemish provinces. The turn against bilingualism  was due to frustration with the slow progress of the language laws, the diffusion of  regional-linguistic ideas because of earlier legislative and political developments, the  introduction of universal male suffrage which increased the political power of the  Flemings, and the associated wish to strengthen the Flemish movement’s social  base by stressing regional commonalities and continuities at the expense of national  integration under francophone dominance. It is important to note here that the  regionalization of the language question was contingent on crucial political factors  rather than something inscribed at birth in the very nature of the Belgian state.
2000, January; Lessiter, Freeman et al., 2000, March; Ijsselsteinjn et al., 2001;  
Novak, Hoffman et al., May 1998).


    
10  
Although we defined social presence as “a sense of being with another” in the  
virtual environment, we consider this definition a tentative, but useful, shorthand.
By the end of the article we hope to show that this typical definition may not be  
inadequate for the explication and measurement of social presence.
Before we review definitions of social presence, it is valuable to note that a  
number of theories of social presence have roots in symbolic interactionism  
(Blumer, 1969) and social psychological theories of interpersonal communication.
The term “social presence” in the context of mediated communication may have  
emerged in the work of Short, Williams and Christie in the 1970s (Short, Williams et  
al., 1976). In effort to define a social psychology of telecommunication they may  
have extended the use of a term that was used in social psychology to describe the  
behavioral effects of the physical presence of another human being or the thought  
that another human being is in position to observe. This physical “social presence”  
was conceptualized simply as “another person is perceived as present or absent.”  
Only in the telecommunication context did this notion of presence or absence  
become problematic. For Short et al., it was no longer binary, but more of a  
continuum where mediated others could be more or less present.  For this, they  
may have been influenced by Goffman’s notion of “co-presence,” which we discuss  
in greater detail.
The influence of classic social psychologist, George Herbert Mead (Mead and  
Moris, 1934) can be seen in the earliest formulations of mediated social presence  
especially on the notion that the other is a symbolic construction created through  
interaction. A central concept for symbolic interactionism was the concept of the  
“generalized other,” which was in part an abstraction from one’s interactions with  


    
11  
all physical others. Symbolic interactionism emphasized that symbolic  
representations were central to all social phenomena, that models of the other  
contributed to our conceptualizations of the social and helped form the self. In their  
seminal book on the social psychology of telecommunication, Short, et al. (Short,
The raid on SG was a shock because it had a crucial role in integrating the Belgian  space economy and indirectly controlled over a third of the Belgian economy  (Economist 1988). SG tried to stave off this hostile bid by (illegally) increasing its own  capital. A week later a Belgian businessman, André Leysen, proposed a  redistribution of SG shares in order to provide a Belgian anchor for SG and thus keep  part of its economic decision-making power in domestic hands (Cottenier, De  Boosere and Gounet 1989, Lamy 1990). But Leysen’s co-operation with SG  foundered his Leysen’s financial and institutional links with the French holding  Paribas. Paribas is the long-time rival of Suez, a French holding which in 1987 had  established cross-participations with SG as mutual protection against hostile take-



 22  
overs. SG governor Lamy, who felt threatened by Leysens’ ambitions, asked Suez to  intervene in the acquisition struggle, which it did after some hesitation – inter alia  because it feared becoming de Benedetti’s next target. After Leysen’s failure,  Maurice Lippens of AG, Belgium’s biggest insurance company, made a second  Belgian anchoring attempt. Lippens did reach an agreement with Suez and together  they acquired a majority of SG. Belgian anchoring seemed to have been ‘realised’,  albeit with a majority of French shares (van Waterschoot 1988).
  
The Flemish business magazine Trends, a staunch promoter of Flemish as opposed  to Belgian anchoring, initially welcomed the hostile bid on SG (Crols 1988b). For  Flemish nationalists and politicians, SG was the symbol of the Belgian francophone  economic elite, which, they felt, had always disregarded Flemings and blocked  economic opportunities for Flanders. The then Trends chief editor, Frans Crols, wrote  that Flemings felt liberated after “having been pushed into a servant’s role for 165  years by the rentiers of the Koningsstraat”13 and that “this does not concern the  Belgian economy, the raid is concerned with one third of the Belgian economy, the  most outmoded and dormant”. Trends hailed the acquisition struggle as the final blow  to the traditional Belgian francophone holding bourgeoisie and wrote optimistically  about the opportunities this new situation offered Flanders. When Suez entered the  scene, however, the tone of the Trends commentaries changed (see e.g. Crols  1988a). Its intervention was portrayed as a friend’s service within the same traditional  francophone establishment and was seized on by Flemish anchorers to attack  Belgian anchoring as a Trojan horse intended to keep francophone control over the  Flemish economy (Brockmans 1995).
The strategy of Belgian anchoring failed for two main reasons. First, the takeover of  SG removed the main anchor and guiding force of the Belgian space economy with  the result that it was harder to maintain a coherent strategy. Second, the strategy’s  national orientation was undermined as the Belgian economy and its social  embedding experienced political-economic regionalisation on two fronts. For the  Walloon and socialist labour movement blamed the deepening crisis of the Walloon  economy on the conservative economic strategy of SG and other Belgian holdings;  and many Flemish politicians became disillusioned with the Belgian holdings  because they had, it was felt, contributed little to Flemish economic development.


 23  
This regionalisation process undermined the integrity of the Belgian political economy  in which SG’s political-economic power was embedded and on which its social and  symbolic reproduction depended. This regionalisation of hearts and minds explains  why the Belgian state found it hard to take effective Belgian anchoring action even  though Minister of Finance Eyskens and Minister for Economy Maystadt tried to  defend ‘vital Belgian interests’ against de Benedetti (Crols 1988b; Crols 1988c;  Foster 2000; Lamy 1990). For there was no consensus within the government and  Belgium’s political-economic elite on how to respond to the acquisition struggle.
METHODS 
In the autumn of 2001 quantitative cross-sectional surveys were conducted in eight countries (Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine) by local organizations with expertise in survey research, and using standardized methods (Living Conditions, Lifestyle and Health Project n.d.). The methods have been described in detail elsewhere 
1930 HSR: Health Services Research 39:6, Part II (December 2004) 


(Pomerleau et al. 2003). In brief, each survey sought to include representative samples of the national adult population aged 18 years and older, although a few small regions had to be excluded because of geographic inaccessibility, sociopolitical situation or prevailingmilitary actions: Abkhazhia andOsetia in Georgia, the Trans-Dniester region and municipality of Bender in Moldova, and the Chechen and Ingush republics and the autonomous districts located in the far north of the Russian Federation.
Samples were selected using multistage random sampling with stratification by region and area. Within each primary sampling unit, households were selected using standardized random route procedures, except in Armenia where random sampling from household lists was used. Within each household the adult with the nearest birthday was selected for interview.
It was decided to include at least 2,000 respondents in each country, but to boost this number to 4,000 in the Russian Federation, and to 2,500 in Ukraine to reflect the larger and more regionally diverse populations in those countries. The combined dataset contained valid data on health-seeking behavior for 18,428 individuals.
The first draft of the questionnaire was developed in consultation with country representatives from pre-existing surveys conducted in other transition countries and from the New Russia Barometer surveys (Post-Communist Barometer Surveys n.d.) adjusted to the national context. It was developed in English, translated into appropriate national languages, back translated to check consistency, and piloted in each country. The questionnaire covered a wide range of issues related to living conditions, lifestyle, and health, supplemented by an extensive battery of questions on sociodemographic and economic characteristics, experience of and attitudes to political transition, psychosocial characteristics, and social networks and support. This article utilizes responses to questions on decisions to seek care, the circumstances of obtaining care, and coping strategies substituting for formal treatment in the health system.
The questionnairewas administered by trained interviewers using face-to-face interviews conducted in respondents’ homes. Statistical analysis was undertaken using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS Inc. 2003).
RESULTS Utilization Rates 
In the preceding 12 months, in the sample as a whole, 52 percent of respondents visited a medical doctor, 5 percent visited a medical assistant ( feldsher), and 44 percent did not visit any health professional. When weighted for the 
Health Service Utilization in the Former Soviet Union 1931 


differing populations of the countries, the corresponding figures for them as a regional grouping are 61.1 percent, 4.3 percent, and 34.7 percent, respectively. However, the probability of attending a health professional in the previous year varied widely across countries, ranging from 65.7 percent in Belarus to 24.4 percent in Georgia (Figure 1).
METHODS Study population The Japanese study population included white-collar and bluecollar male workers aged 35–55 years in a sash and zipper factory in Toyama prefecture on the Western coast of Japan. The participants completed a questionnaire in 1990, with a response rate of 89%. The cohort consisted of 2504 male employees. Information on occupational category, white-collar or bluecollar work, and employment grade at baseline was obtained from company records. Higher grade consists of executive or managerial workers for white-collar workers and foremen for blue-collar workers, and lower grade consists of others. The British Whitehall II study cohort included male civil servants aged 35–55 working in the 20 departments who completed a baseline survey in 1985–1988, altogether 6290 men.13 
The response rate was 73%. Almost all the participants were white-collar. Information on employment grade was obtained by asking participants to give their civil service grade at the time of the baseline survey. The civil service identifies 12 non-industrial grades which, in order of decreasing salary, consist of seven ‘unified grades’, senior executive officers, higher executive officers, executive officers, clerical officers and office support staff. According to the grade of employment, we classified them into two groups, higher grade and lower grade. Higher grade contains seven ‘unified grades’, senior executive officer, higher executive officer and lower grade contains executive officer, clerical officer and clerical assistants and office support staff.
 EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH 2004; 14: 413–416  European Journal of Public Health, Vol. 14, No. 4 © European Public Health Association 2004; all rights reserved 
* Y. Morikawa1, P. Martikainen2,3, J. Head3, M. Marmot3, M. Ishizaki4,
H. Nakagawa1  
1) Department of Public Health, Kanazawa Medical University,
Uchinada-machi, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa, Japan 
2) Population Research Unit, Department of Sociology, University of Helsinki,
Finland 
3) International Centre for Health and Society, Department of Epidemiology 
and Public Health, University College London Medical School, London, UK 
4) Department of Hygiene, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada-machi,
Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa, Japan 
Correspondence: Yuko Morikawa, PhD, Department of Public Health,
because either the authorities themselves do not know or deliberately bias their reporting.
The media only pick up on some terrorist events, mostly those occurring in the larger 
cities or the capital of the country, where the foreign journalists normally reside. Terrorist 
action taking place in remote rural areas is rarely, if ever, reported in the media. The 
problem of biased reporting is especially severe in less developed and authoritarian 
countries (see e.g. Miller 1994).
The problems associated with the limits of comparing different types of attacks and of 
biased reporting of attacks have been addressed in various ways in the literature. First, the 
analysis is usually confined to developed countries where the reporting bias is less of a 
problem. Second, the consequences are often estimated for a small number of countries,
or even a single country, where modes of attack are comparable across countries and over 
time (exceptions are the combined cross-country and time-series analyses of Blomberg et 
al. 2004a; Nitsch and Schumacher 2004 discussed below). Third, some authors explicitly 
differentiate between attacks of different types and at different locations (see e.g. Drakos 
and Kutan 2003; Fielding 2003b).
In the case of international terrorism, where foreign interests are involved, the reporting 
bias is likely to be less severe. Employing the official US definition of terrorism (22 USC 
§ 2656f[d]), the US Department of State issues series covering the annual number of 
incidents of international terrorism and the number of fatalities. International terrorism is 
defined as terrorism involving citizens or the territory of more than one country. These 
series are depicted in figure 1.


- 5 -

0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
19 68 
19 70 
19 72 
19 74 
19 76 
19 78 
19 80 
19 82 
19 84 
19 86 
19 88 
19 90 
19 92 
19 94 
19 96 
19 98 
20 00 
20 02 
Number of Fatalities Number of Incidents 
3250 
Figure 1: International terrorism, 1968-2003, number of incidents and number of fatalities 
Source: US Department of State (various years) and Sandler and Enders (2004).
Newell, & Wiese, 1992). But they also tend to be located in rural and less racially diverse  


Diversity at Liberal Arts Colleges 7  
locations. Even so, it appears that a distinctive dimension of contemporary liberal arts colleges is  
their ability to expose students to diversity in educationally purposeful ways. How they do this is  
not clear.
Purpose  
This study examines the nature of student experiences with diversity at liberal arts  
colleges. Specifically, three questions guide the investigation.
1. How do students at liberal arts colleges compare with their counterparts at other types  
of institutions in terms of their diversity-related experiences?
2. What organizational factors and conditions are related to diversity experiences at  
liberal arts colleges?
3. What are the relationships between diversity experiences at liberal arts colleges and  
other educationally purposeful activities and outcomes?
Data Source  
 Data for this study come from the National Survey of Student Engagement. The NSSE is  
an annual survey of first-year and senior students that measures the degree to which students  
participate in educational practices that prior research shows are linked to valued outcomes of  
college (Chickering & Gamson, 1987; Kuh, 2001).
ERIC NEUMAYER 405 


but no such positive worldwide trend is apparent in terms of violent political conflict and human rights violations. Again, Western Europe can contribute to mitigating asylum migration pressure if its policies help to solve the fundamental causes of conflict and human rights abuse. If it fails to prevent these events from occurring, then it will have to face the migration pressure. The conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, with its hundreds of thousands of people fleeing to Western Europe, represent a stark warning. It is only recently that the EU has recognized the need for a ‘‘comprehensive approach to migration addressing political, human rights and development issues in countries and regions of origin and transit. This requires combating poverty, improving living conditions and job opportunities, preventing conflicts and consolidating democratic states and ensuring respect for human rights. . .’’ (European Council, 1999: para.11).17 It has yet to prove that this commitment is real and not merely something reserved to non-binding declarations of good will (Boswell, 2003). Of course, economic factors cannot be cleanly separated from others. For ex-

ample, persistent episodes of conflict and violence can increase economic hardship in countries of origin. Also, those fleeing from persecution and violence might also seek better economic conditions in the country of destination. Lower travel costs have made it easier for people to flee to Western developed countries instead of seeking refuge in neighboring, equally poor developing countries. Theory predicts that even those fleeing from persecution will naturally prefer to migrate to developed countries if given a choice. The UNHCR argues that ‘‘many people leave their home countries for a combination of political, economic and other reasons. This mixture of motives is one factor creating a perception of widespread abuse of asylum systems, which is often manipulated by politicians and the media’’ (UNHCR, 2000:155). One of the problems is that some of the non-economic determinants of asylum 
migration such as dissident violence, ethnic/civil war, state failure, and repressive political conditions are often not recognized as valid grounds for granting full asylum status in many Western European countries. For example, Germany tends to refuse asylum to those applicants persecuted by non-governmental agents, but might provide them with de facto protection (UNHCR, 2000:163). Many more do not recognize generalized threats, for which it is difficult to prove that they have been directed specifically against an individual. A Joint Position Paper of the Council of the EU states that ‘‘reference to a civil war or internal or generalized armed conflict and the dangers which it entails is not in itself sufficient to warrant the grant of refugee status. Fear of persecution must in all cases (. . .) be individual in nature’’ (European Council, 1996: para. 6). Asylum seekers falling into this category have typically not been granted full asylum recognition, but have still been allowed to remain in the country on humanitarian grounds. The resulting low recognition rates for full asylum status in turn is likely to foster the public perception of large-scale abuse of seemingly generous asylum provisions by ‘‘bogus’’ asylum seekers. There is therefore a case for broadening the definitional scope for the grounds establishing valid claims for asylum to include these other threats to personal integrity.
References 
ALESINA, ALBERT, AND DAVID DOLLAR (2000) Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why? Journal of Economic Growth 5(1):33–63.
APODACA, CLAIR (1998) Human Rights Abuses: Precursor to Refugee Flight? Journal of Refugee Studies 11(1):80–93.
17 Similarly, European Council (2002).
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe406 


BAUER, THOMAS, AND KLAUS ZIMMERMANN (1994) ‘‘Modelling International Migration: Economic and Econometric Issues.’’ In Causes of International Migration, edited by Rob van der Erf and Liesbeth Heering, pp. 95–115. Brussels, Belgium: Statistical Office of the European Communities.
Economic Imaginaries and Region-Building    
‘The new regionalism’ is an umbrella term for research on how regions are  constituted by, and constitutive of, social, economic and political relations and  identities, especially in response to globalization (Paasi 2002). This poses the  question of what constitutes a region or regional economy because, as Jones notes,  the region has become a ‘slippery and somewhat meaningless concept for  discussing differently scaled and territorialized economic, social, cultural and political  assemblages’ (2004: 62). Approaching regions as historically and geographically  contingent entities offers an escape from this conundrum by situating them in a multi-scalar framework of administrative structures, functional economic and social ties  and meanings invested in them by residents and outsiders. This solution can be  enhanced by taking regional imaginaries and identities seriously as potentially key  


 14  
factors in the co-constitution of the political and economic during the creation and  institutionalization of regional economies (Agnew 2000; Jones 2004; Paasi 1991).  We follow this approach in our study of Belgian and Flemish anchoring strategies,  which rest on different conceptions of the Belgian space economy and its internal  differentiation and have very different linkages with extra-economic values and  identities. In exploring the selection of these strategies we show that history and  institutions matter because of the changing articulation, instantiation, and spatial  implications of three cleavages in the Belgian social formation: religion, language,  and class. For economic imaginaries have been shaped by the social embedding of  the economic order within this broader formation and successful pursuit of their  associated strategies depends heavily on their extra-economic contexts and supports  as well as on their purported economic feasibility. In this sense, CPE can contribute  to the understanding of new regionalism because it promises to integrate semiotic  factors into the analysis of the institutionalization of regional economies without  falling into ‘soft economic sociology’. The latter tends to limit the cultural turn to the  role of cultural factors as business assets in underpinning regional growth strategies  and regional competitiveness and to ignore issues of power (cf. Lovering 2001).
Our case study (conducted by Stijn Oosterlynck) develops a CPE account of the  attempted restructuring of the Belgian space economy11 in response to globalization  and its associated relativization of scale,12  focusing in this context on the Belgian  ‘anchoring’ concept and its subsequent translation into a distinctive but ambivalent  Flemish ‘anchoring strategy’. In particular, it explores changing political and  economic imaginaries, their mobilization of alternative ideas of economic nationalism,  and the resulting tensions/convergences with more general political and economic  restructuring. Moreover, drawing on the distinction between variation, selection, and  retention, it shows that, even when certain regional imaginaries are discursively  selected from a wider array and are translated into regional strategies pursued by  major social forces, they may prove ‘arbitrary, rationalistic and willed’. In other words,  they will not be retained (institutionalized) in a coherent set of sustainable, region-building apparatuses and policies because they lack the necessary material and  discursive supports to ensure their effective implementation and integration into a  reproducible economic and political order. In such cases CPE suggests that there will  be a renewed search for a plausible and effective imaginary. This is certainly the  


 15  
case in Flanders, where the newly hegemonic imaginary, yet to be properly tested,  appears to be liberalization (Oosterlynck 2006).
The development of the Flemish region is rooted in the distinctive articulation of two  structural trends in Belgian history: (a) territorialization of the Belgian language  conflict and (b) the changing forms of regional uneven economic development. The  two economic imaginaries (see below) that have proved most resonant in the recent  anchoring debate are rooted in these historical developments and have contributed  to the rise of the Flemish space economy as an object of strategic intervention  without, however, transforming it in line with the strategic objectives of either of the  corresponding anchoring strategies. We seek to explain this in CPE terms below.
Determinants of Asylum Migration to Western Europe398 


data on the size of communities from origin countries in Western European destination countries. We therefore take the moving sum of asylum applicants from the prior 5 to 2 years as our proxy of migration networks (ASYLUMSTOCK).13 
Other potentially important deterrents, which we could not take into account because of lack of data, include visa requirements, asylum procedures and recognition rates, regulations with regard to welfare benefits and working rights of asylum seekers, forced removal, repatriation rates, etc. In as much as they apply to asylum seekers from all countries similarly, these effects will, however, be covered by the use of year-specific time dummies. Finally, we include population size (POPULATION) as a control variable since 
countries of origin with a greater population size might also send more asylum seekers to EU countries, all other things equal. Also, people living in cities are likely to be better informed about migration possibilities and are more footloose. We therefore include the urbanization rate (%URBAN). Data for both variables are taken from World Bank (2001). We log those explanatory variables that are strictly positive and for which an 
elasticity interpretation of their coefficients makes sense in the estimations in which the dependent variable is also logged: namely the asylum stock, population, income, and minimum distance variables.14 Table 2 presents some summary information on all variables. Variance inflation factors were computed to check for multicollinearity. The factors for all individual variables are below 5, with the mean value below 2. There is therefore no reason to be concerned about multicollinearity.
TABLE 2. Summary Descriptive Variable Information 
Variable Observations Mean SD Minimum Maximum 
ln ASYLUM 2,046 4.51 3.25 0 12.30 ASYLUM 2,046 2,427.59 9,169.76 0 219,741 ln ASYLUMSTOCK 2,046 15.13 12.61 0 46.33 ln GDP 2,046 7.91 0.91 6.08 10.42 GROWTH 2,046 ? 0.07 5.50 ? 26.17 37.66 %POP15–64 2,046 56.98 5.93 45.32 72.65 ECONDISCRIMINATION 2,046 0.31 0.57 0 3.39 AUTOCRACY 2,046 9.25 3.41 2 14 RIGHTSVIOLATION 2,046 2.81 1.03 1 5 DISSIDENTVIOLENCE 1,461 0.79 2.15 0 27 DOMWAR/STATEFAIL 2,046 0.64 1.23 0 5 GEN/POLITICIDE 2,046 0.15 0.73 0 5.5 EXTERNAL WAR 2,046 0.11 0.53 0 3 FOOD 2,046 99.11 17.98 33 216.8 NATURAL DISASTER 2,046 370.50 4,135.46 0 142,169 ln POPULATION 2,046 16.00 1.60 11.09 20.95 %URBAN 2,046 44.91 22.72 4.1 100 ln DISTANCE 2,046 7.90 0.79 5.72 9.29 %CHRIST 2,046 37.77 38.22 0 99.1 COLONY 2,046 28.90 27.70 0 60 AID 1,836 8.57 13.97 0 210.49 TRADE 1,874 70.17 46.52 1.41 406.75 TOURISTS 1,832 1,465.98 3,318.21 0 27,047 
GDP, gross domestic product per capita.
13 At the start of the panel, this variable goes back fewer years to avoid a 5-year loss of observations. 14 The results of our analysis would not be dramatically different if these variables were not logged.
ERIC NEUMAYER 399 


Estimation Technique 
We estimate the following model: 
yit ¼ aþ b1 X5 
k¼2 yiðt?kÞ þ b2xit þ 
XT?1 
j¼1 gjDj þ eit; where eit ¼ ui þ vit: ð1Þ 
The subscript i represents each country of origin in year t, and y is the number of people filing for asylum. The second term on the right-hand side is the ASYLUMSTOCK variable, on which more will be mentioned below. The vector x contains the other explanatory variables. The (T ? 1) year-specific dummy variables D capture general developments such as lower transportation costs and tighter communication links, which facilitate the search for asylum for individuals in all countries of origin (UNHCR, 2000). Similarly, they control for a potential increase in asylum migration following restrictions on legal economic migration and family reunification. They also capture policy measures to reduce the number of asylum seekers, such as visa restrictions, sanctions for carriers, the benefits for and general accommodation conditions of asylum seekers, and the like, to the extent that these policy measures apply to all countries of origin equally. Their inclusion is important as these policy measures are difficult, if not impossible, to quantify. The ui represent individual unobserved or latent country effects. These capture time-invariant characteristics of countries of origin that are either not measurable or not captured by our explanatory variables. The vit is a stochastic error term. We first estimate (1) with FE. We use standard errors that are fully robust and 
adjusted for the clustering of observations, that is, observations are merely assumed to be independent across countries, but not necessarily within countries. The FE estimator subtracts from the equation to be estimated over the time average of the equation for each country. Because of this so-called within transformation, the individual country effects ui are wiped out, and the coefficients are estimated based on the time variation within each cross-sectional unit only. Any correlation of the FE with the explanatory variables is therefore rendered unproblematic. Unfortunately, by definition, the FE estimator cannot estimate time-invariant explanatory variables. We therefore also estimate (1) with a population-averaged generalized estimating equation (GEE) estimator with an assumed Gaussian distribution of the dependent variable. The GEE estimator is asymptotically equivalent to a random-effects estimator, but additionally allows standard errors to be adjusted for clustering. For both estimators, the dependent variable is logged in order to render its distribution less skewed, after adding one to make such logging possible for zero values.15 
The second term on the right-hand side variable, ASYLUMSTOCK, is similar to a lagged dependent variable. However, we take the sum of the past 5- to 2-year dependent variable rather than the simple 1-year lag of the dependent variable for two reasons. One is to average out coincidental temporary ups and downs, and the other is to capture the more long-term presence of groups of asylum seekers from specific countries of origin. Hence, while the dependent variable is a flow, ASYLUMSTOCK is a stock variable as its name suggests. Second, the value of the immediately preceding year is left out to mitigate correlation of the variable with the error term. The reason is that correlation of one of the regressors with the error term leads to bias in OLS estimation results. To avoid this bias, one would need to use a dynamic Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator. However, this 
15 Such a procedure can be problematic, as shown by King (1989), who suggests using special regression techniques for count data, that is, for discrete, strictly positive data with typically a substantial share of values of zero. In sensitivity analysis, we used a population-averaged GEE estimator with a negative binomial distribution of the dependent variable. Results are broadly in line with those reported below, suggesting that the estimators used do not unduly bias the results.
?
?
Effects of Economic Openness on Sustainable Development 735 


ization leads to “global pillage+”30 Antiglobalization activists successfully scuttled the Multilateral Agreement on Investment ~MAI! on the basis that it would allow corporations to destroy the global commons+ Giant corporations are accused of “stealing” the patrimony of the poor and the unborn for conspicuous consumption by the rich and globalization leads to cost-cutting, not efficient allocation of resources, and to downward pressure on environmental and social standards:31 
The pursuit of high and rising consumption in the North and of development in the South have together led to the increasing exploitation of natural resources in unsustainable ways, often by TNC investment in resource-extractive industries in developing countries+ + + + Policies focusing on liberalization, deregulation and export orientation respond to the logic of short-term profit maximization and international competition that intensifies the need for costcutting++ The result is the rapacious exploitation and wasteful use of natural resources+32 
Some critics of globalization also assert that increasing trade and specialization may work against efficiency viewed in terms of the dependent nature of most poor countries on the export of primary commodities+ Increased trade may snare the poor countries in a “specialization trap” that locks them into servicing a world market growing ever more hungry for resources+33 Others have argued that political structures within countries favor capital at the expense of resource protection, which leads to the subsidization of foreign investors at the expense of sustainability+34 More generally, critics of globalization argue that trade agreements bind countries to standardized laws and regulations that will reduce the ability for governments and societies to make autonomous decisions by addressing local problems with local solutions+ Moreover, critics argue that the systemic interdependence takes away agency from governments of less developed countries ~LDCs!+ Greater integration of developing countries in market relations diminishes their capacity to act independently, because those countries become locked in dependent relations with the rich+ Countries more dependent on trade and investment are expected not to be able to follow sustainable paths of development, because it would be against the interests of international capital+35 
Many pessimists argue that increasing income alone will not automatically take care of environmental problems, because the level of income of many poor countries is so low that increased consumption in rich areas will place too great a burden on an already overloaded planet, long before the poor get rich+36 In other words,
30+ Brecher and Costello 1994+ 31+ See Hardt and Negri 2000; Korten 2001; Martin and Schumann 1997; and Zammit 2003+ 32+ Zammit 2003, 137+ 33+ Røpke 1994+ 34+ López 2003+ 35+ See Grimes and Kentor 2003; Roberts and Grimes 1997; and York, Rosa, and Dietz 2003+ 36+ See Daily and Ehrlich 1996; and Daly 1993+ 
6 6 
INO59~3! 05025 6042 05023005 4:23 PM PAGE:736 
?
?
?
